hon
lab
la
phon

Laboratory Phonology
Journal of the Association for
Laboratory Phonology

Seeliger, H., & Repp, S. (2023). Information-structural surprises?
Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent shift and
deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts. Laboratory
Phonology: Journal of the Association for Laboratory Phonology,
14(1), pp. 1-46. DOI: https://doi.org/10.16995/labphon.6451

Information-structural surprises? Contrast,
givenness, and (the lack of ) accent shift and
deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts
Heiko Seeliger*, Department of German Language and Literature I, University of Cologne, Germany, heiko.seeliger@
uni-koeln.de
Sophie Repp, Department of German Language and Literature I, University of Cologne, Germany, sophie.repp@unikoeln.de
*Corresponding author.

It is well-established for assertions that the information-structural status of referents influences
prosodic prominence: givenness reduces and contrastive focus increases prominence, relative
to newness. We present production data in German on the prosodic marking of givenness and
contrast in comparison to newness in two non-assertive speech acts: polar exclamatives and
polar questions. The results show that contrastive focus is consistently marked in both speech
acts: through an increase of prosodic prominence on the contrastive element itself, and through
a decrease of prominence of a word in the prenuclear region that in sentences without contrast
typically is prominent. Givenness is not clearly marked prosodically in either speech act. We
argue that givenness is necessary, but not sufficient for deaccentuation. First, if deaccentuation
requires an accent shift (so that the intonation phrase is headed), the semantic-pragmatic effects
of the shifted accent must fit the discourse context. We argue that there are subtle discourse
conditions on accent shift in the questions involving verum focus, preventing a shift. Second,
deaccentuation is disfavored if speech act marking requires accentuation, as in exclamatives.
Overall, the different functions of prosody show subtle interactions, hinting at a subordinate
functional load of givenness marking but not of contrast marking.

Laboratory Phonology: Journal of the Association for Laboratory Phonology is a peer-reviewed open access journal published by
the Open Library of Humanities. (c) 2023 The Author(s). This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

OPEN ACCESS

2

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

1. Introduction
The prosody of an utterance can serve many functions. One function is to signal which speech act

the utterance is intended to carry out. For example, an English declarative sentence like He likes

cats can express an assertion or a question, depending on its nuclear accent, boundary tone and
other prosodic characteristics. With the assertion He likes cats., the speaker takes responsibility

for the truth of the proposition he likes cats; with the question He likes cats?, the speaker asks the
addressee to indicate which of the propositions {he likes cats, he does not like cats} is true. Another
function of prosody is to indicate the information-structural status of referents or expressions
that are mentioned in the utterance, such as whether they represent given or new information.

For example, in the sequence Paul got a cat. He likes cats., the object of the second sentence, cats,

typically is deaccented because it is lexically given, and the nuclear accent, which in an all-new
sentence would be on cats, shifts to likes.

The prosodic marking of speech acts has mainly attracted theoretical and empirical

attention for the most `canonical' speech acts: Assertions and questions. Other speech acts have

been investigated much less frequently and their characteristics are less well understood. For
instance, for German - the language under investigation in this paper - there is much work on

the comparison between assertions and questions, and on questions of different types (e.g., von

Essen, 1966; Isaenko & Schadlich, 1966; Batliner, 1989; Selting, 1995; Kugler, 2003; Schneider

& Lintfert, 2003; Kohler, 2004; Grice, Baumann & Benzmuller 2005; Niebuhr, Bergherr, Huth,
Lill, & Neuschulz, 2010; Petrone & Niebuhr, 2014; Repp & Rosin, 2015; Repp, 2015, 2020;

Wochner, Schlegel, Dehe, & Braun, 2015; Michalsky, 2017; Neitsch & Niebuhr, 2019; Braun,
Dehe, Neitsch, Wochner, & Zahner, 2019; Repp & Seeliger, 2020). Less common speech acts,
such as exclamations, orders, or rejections have received less or no attention. Previous work on

German exclamations includes Batliner (1988a, 1988b), Oppenrieder (1988), Repp (2015, 2020),
Repp & Seeliger (2020), and Seeliger & Repp (2020). Although an early focus of investigation
in particular for questions lay on the boundary tones at the end of utterances, it is by now clear

that question marking can have prosodic effects across the entire utterance. Similarly, we know
now that exclamations are not just marked by the so-called exclamative accent. Thus, speech act
marking is a `global affair', concerning the entire utterance with - as we will discuss below -
local specifics.

Similarly, the prosodic marking of information structure (IS), which concerns both the

expression whose IS status is marked and other parts of the clause, has been investigated mostly

for assertions. This holds for all IS categories (givenness, new information focus, topicality,
contrastive focus, contrastive topics). There is limited work on prosodic marking of certain IS
categories in questions in several European languages (Repp, 2020 on German; Chen, 2012 on

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Dutch; Grice & Savino, 2003; Ventura, Grice, Savino, Kolev, Brilmayer, & Schumacher, 2020

on Italian; Seeliger & Repp, 2017 on Swedish) and in exclamations in German (Batliner, 1988a;
Repp, 2015, 2020; Repp & Seeliger, 2020; Seeliger & Repp, 2020). It appears that IS might

be marked differently in questions and exclamations than in assertions. There may be several
reasons for this.

First, the `default' prosodic characteristics of non-assertive speech acts, such as the distribution

of accents or accent types, or the boundary tones, are different from those of assertions. This might
have consequences for the prosodic marking of IS. For example, nuclear L* accents are more

common in (polar) questions than in assertions and they often precede a high boundary tone. If an
element that would normally carry a L* accent in a question is focused, which typically is marked
with higher prosodic prominence, the marking might not involve higher pitch as in assertions but

lower pitch. The reason is that focus marking by high pitch in assertions may be conceptualized

as a prominent deviation from the pitch baseline (e.g., Kugler & Genzel, 2012; Repp, 2020), and
this baseline is low (falling) in assertions but high (rising) in questions. Relatedly, exclamations

have been suggested to come with a prosodic constructional default, which involves certain
requirements on accentuation (Repp & Seeliger, 2020). These requirements might conflict with
requirements of IS marking, such as deaccentuation.

Second, differences in prosodic IS marking in non-assertive speech acts and assertions

might arise from the semantics/pragmatics of the speech acts. For example, the content of an

exclamation often is assumed to be presupposed (e.g., Michaelis & Lambrecht, 1996; d'Avis,

2002; Zanuttini & Portner, 2003; Abels, 2010). Presupposed content may be considered to be
given to some degree, so that further marking of information as either new or given might be
influenced by this characteristic (Repp & Seeliger, 2020).

The present paper investigates the prosodic marking of IS in two non-assertive speech acts.

We present the results of a production study investigating polar exclamatives and polar questions

in German. The sentences used to express these speech acts are string-identical in the absence of
speech-act-specific modal particles, e.g.:1
(1)

1

Hat der
kleine Lamas gefunden !/?
has hedpron small llamas found
Exclamative: `(Boy,) did he find small llamas!'
Question:
`Did he find small llamas?'

In written language, punctuation disambiguates the speech acts.

3

4

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Sentences like (1) may be disambiguated by the context and by prosody. Thus, embedding such

sentences in disambiguating contexts allows us to investigate the impact of both the particular
speech act and the IS on their prosodic characteristics. The IS categories that we investigate in
this study are contrastive focus and givenness in comparison to new information focus.

The paper is structured as follows: Sections 2 and 3 discuss previous findings on the

prosody of questions and exclamations including the marking of IS. Section 4 presents our

research questions and hypotheses, and describes the experimental setup. Section 5 presents
the results. Section 6 discusses the findings and relates them to the research questions.
Section 7 concludes.

2. Prosodic marking of speech acts: Exclamations and questions
Polar questions request a yes- or no-answer from the addressee: They are used to find out whether

a proposition is true or not. German polar questions come in different syntactic forms. They may

have an interrogative syntax, which means that the verb is in clause-initial position (=verbfirst), or they may have a declarative syntax, with the verb in the second position. However,

as in other Germanic languages, German declarative questions have specific usage conditions
concerning the context and previous assumptions of the speaker (cp. Gunlogson, 2003, 2008 on

English; Seeliger & Repp, 2018, Seeliger, 2019 on German). In this paper, we are only interested
in the more regular, verb-first questions and reserve the term polar question for these.

Exclamations highlight the speaker's surprise or astonishment at a state of affairs. They

map to a great variety of syntactic sentence types. German inter alia has verb-first exclamatives

(which are string-identical to polar questions) and wh-exclamatives (which come in both verbsecond and verb-final variants) (d'Avis, 2013, 2016 for an overview). When using a verb-first

exclamative, which is the structure under investigation here, the speaker expresses their surprise

at the degree to which a certain property holds, for instance in (1) the size of the llamas that `he'
found. Other types of exclamations can also express that the speaker is surprised that a certain

state of affairs holds at all. We are using the term polar exclamative to refer to verb-first, non-whexclamatives in order to underline the syntactic string identity of polar exclamatives and polar
questions, without making semantic claims.

Turning to prosody, German polar questions typically contain a low (L*) or a rising (L+H*)

nuclear pitch accent rather than a high or falling accent as assertions do (e.g., Kugler, 2003;
Grice et al., 2005; Repp & Seeliger, 2020). The position of the accent has not been reported to

be different from the position of the nuclear accent in assertions. So, in all-new sentences with
transitive structures like (1), the accent occurs on the head noun of the most deeply embedded
argument, Lamas `llamas'.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

The nuclear accent in polar questions is often followed by a high boundary tone resulting in

a rising final contour, but if the accent is rising it may also be followed by a low boundary tone
so that the question displays a falling utterance-final pitch movement (Kugler, 2003). The choice

of final pitch movement may be influenced by several factors. For instance, rising questions
(of various types) tend to signal that the speaker leaves the expected answer open, which can
convey friendliness. Falling questions signal an expectation of routine answers, which can come

across as fact-oriented or even curt (e.g., Kugler, 2003; Kohler, 2004; Petrone & Niebuhr, 2014;
Michalsky, 2015). On this view, high boundary tones are not inherently related to the speech

act of questioning, or interrogativity, which allows a unified analysis for instance of final rises
in questions and continuation rises in assertions, both signaling openness or incompleteness

(Michalsky, 2017). According to Michalsky (2015), the strongest cue for interrogativity is the
absolute value of the final rise offset (i.e., the height of the (H%) boundary tone). Another factor

for the choice between high vs. low boundary tone is speech mode, with final rises occurring
more often in read, than in spontaneous speech (Michalsky, 2017).

Prosodic markers of questionhood other than the final contour may occur quite early in the

utterance. Petrone and Niebuhr (2014) argue that the shape of pre-nuclear accents can influence
the perception of an utterance as a question or an assertion, with shallower falls after the peak

leading to a more frequent identification of an utterance as a question. Similarly, Michalsky (2015)
reports that higher pre-nuclear peaks lead to a slightly stronger perception of interrogativity.

On the utterance level, questions seem to be characterized by a faster speaking rate than

assertions, both in German (Niebuhr et al., 2010) and in other languages (e.g., van Heuven &

van Zanten, 2005 for Manado Malay, Orkney English, and Dutch). An open issue is whether

differences in speaking rate represent truly global (i.e., utterance-level differences), or whether
they are the result of local differences. Niebuhr et al. (2010) found that German questions were

not only faster than assertions but also contained fewer accented syllables than assertions. These

two aspects can be related: Accented syllables tend to be longer than unaccented syllables, so
fewer accented syllables will result in shorter utterance durations, which correspond to a higher
speaking rate.

German exclamations have been claimed to be marked by a so-called exclamative accent,

independently of their particular syntactic structure. This accent is the intuitively most
prominent accent in an exclamation. It has been characterized as having a higher and later

pitch peak when compared to the nuclear accent in assertions (Oppenrieder, 1988; Batliner,
1988a, 1988b), suggesting that the accent might be more similar to an L+H* accent than an H*
accent. However, Repp and Seeliger (2020) report for polar exclamatives that H* accents were
more frequent than L+H* accents. Furthermore, they found that utterance length influences the

5

6

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

choice of accent: L+H* accents occurred more often in short than in long exclamatives. Short
exclamatives also displayed a slower speaking rate than longer exclamatives. Repp and Seeliger

suggest that the slower speaking rate in conjunction with the L+H* may be the result of a more

`exalted' speaking style, which is used to highlight a high degree of `exclamativity'. Regarding
the prominence of L+H* vs. H*, it has been suggested for assertions that L+H* accents are
perceived as more prominent than H* accents (Baumann & Rohr, 2015; Baumann & Winter,

2018). So, polar exclamatives do not seem to come by default with more prominent accents
than with less prominent accents. This assumption is corroborated by the observation that the
arguably very prominent L*+H accent hardly ever occurred in the polar exclamatives elicited
by Repp and Seeliger (2020).

There are certain word classes and structural positions that attract the exclamative accent.

The most common attractors are (a) subject d-pronouns, such as der `he' in (1) (Repp, 2020; Repp

& Seeliger, 2020; Seeliger & Repp, 2020), (b) scalar expressions such as the gradable adjective
kleine `small' in (1) (Altmann, 1993; d'Avis, 2002; Oppenrieder, 1988; Rosengren, 1992, 1997),

and (c) the syntactic C position when filled with a finite verb (i.e., the finite verb in clauseinitial or clause-second position) (Altmann, 1993; Repp, 2020; Repp & Seeliger, 2020). The
presence of several attractors for a prominent accent might explain the observation by Repp and

Seeliger (2020) that speakers overall realized a higher number of accents in exclamatives than
in questions.

Turning to boundary tones, there is agreement that exclamations come with a low boundary

tone independently of the syntactic structure (Altmann, 1993; Repp, 2015, 2020; Repp & Seeliger,
2020; Seeliger & Repp, 2020).

In terms of continuous utterance-level characteristics, exclamations come with a slower

speaking rate than other speech acts. Altmann (1993) observes this for exclamations with

a declarative structure in comparison to assertions, Repp (2020) for wh-exclamatives
in comparison to string-identical wh-questions, and Repp and Seeliger (2020) for polar
exclamatives in comparison to polar questions. The difference with the questions might

partly be due to the faster speaking rate of questions (in comparison to assertions,

see above). To our knowledge, there are no direct comparisons between all three
speech acts.

The bundle of prosodic features that characterize exclamatives (i.e., the realization of

an exclamative accent, a slower speaking rate, and a falling contour) have been proposed to
constitute a constructional prosodic default by Repp and Seeliger (2020). This default furthermore
comprises a reduced sensitivity to information-structural requirements.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

3. Prosodic marking of givenness and contrast in questions and
exclamations
We define an element as lexically and referentially given if the same word denoting the same

(set of) individual(s) is used in the context preceding the relevant utterance, following Baumann
and Riester (2013). An element is new if neither the word nor the denoted individual(s) are
mentioned in the context and if there are no explicit alternatives. An element is contrastive (i.e.,
a contrastive focus), if there is an explicit alternative to the individual(s) denoted by the word

in the context. Note that this definition of contrast does not require that the speech act be a
correction, which is a speech act that is often used in studies on contrast.

In Section 1, we highlighted that the prosodic marking of given, new and contrastively

focused information has mostly been investigated for assertions. We briefly summarize these
findings here before we turn to the few available results for questions and exclamations.

In assertions, given information is marked by deaccentuation, by accents with a low pitch

target, and/or phonetic characteristics that are associated with low prominence, for instance
shorter duration or lower intensity (Baumann, 2006; Baumann & Riester, 2013; Baumann et al.,

2015; Baumann & Rohr, 2015). Low (pitch) prominence can be conceptualized as only a small,
or even missing deviance from the pitch baseline (cp. Kugler & Genzel, 2012; Repp, 2020). New

information is marked by larger deviations from the baseline: In assertions, new information has
higher pitch maxima and a greater pitch expansion than given information, which corresponds
to a higher rate of accentuation and a higher rate of accents with a high target (Kohler, 1991;

Baumann, 2006; Baumann & Grice, 2006; Rohr & Baumann, 2010; Baumann & Riester, 2013,
Baumann et al., 2015). Accents with a high pitch target are perceived as more prominent than

accents with a low target (Baumann & Rohr, 2015). Thus, the deviation from the baseline is

`upwards', if an utterance has an overall falling pitch baseline as assertions do. Contrastively
focused words are often marked by bitonal accents, which are perceived as most prominent

(e.g., L+H* in German). These accents show the largest deviation from the pitch baseline. They

also are characterized by phonetically prominent non-pitch-related characteristics such as a

longer duration and a greater intensity (all measurements are for nuclear accents) (Baumann,
Becker, Grice, & Mucke, 2007; Breen, Fedorenko, Wagner, & Gibson, 2010; Braun, 2006; Braun
& Tagliapetra, 2010; Grice, Ritter, Niemann, & Roettger, 2017).

The above findings suggest that the prosodic characteristics associated with the three IS

concepts lie on a continuum: Given information carries the fewest and acoustically least prominent

accents, contrastively focused information carries the most and acoustically most prominent
accents, while new information sits in between. However, from a semantic and pragmatic

7

8

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

perspective, these concepts do not all lie on a continuum. Givenness vs. newness is indeed a

graded (i.e., scalar concept with information states like accessible and inferrable being scalemedial), and directly given in the immediate context and brand new being the endpoints of the scale

(e.g., Chafe, 1976, 1994; Clark, 1977; Prince, 1981; Lambrecht, 1994; Baumann, 2006). Contrast
lies on a different dimension. It is compatible with givenness and with newness: Something that
is contrasted can have been mentioned or implied before, or not (Molnar, 2002; Repp, 2016).

As mentioned in Section 1, there are reasons to believe that there are differences between IS

marking in assertive vs. non-assertive speech acts. Starting with questions, recall that for rising
questions, a prominence-lending deviance from the rising baseline is expected to be lower,

rather than higher pitch. Indeed, Repp (2020) reports for German verb-final wh-questions

embedded in matrix polar questions, which were often produced with a rising contour, that
the utterance-final stretch of speech following a given direct object was marked by higher

pitch than the stretch of speech following a new object. This suggests that new information
was marked by lower pitch in these structures. In comparison, in non-embedded verb-second
wh-questions, which were mostly realized with a falling contour, accents on new objects had

a higher maximum pitch and a larger pitch excursion than accents on new objects. Regarding
accentuation, given information but not new information was frequently deaccented in the
non-embedded verb-second structures. In the embedded structures, there were no differences,

probably because of the complexity of the structures leading to default accentuation. Finally,
there was a reduction of the utterance-level maximum pitch and pitch range in non-embedded
structures when the object was given.

For exclamations, it has been claimed that IS is not marked in German at all (Batliner, 1988a,

1988b; Jacobs, 1988). However, it has also been suggested that the exclamative accent CAN be

used to mark (contrastive) focus (Altmann, 1993; d'Avis, 2016). There is empirical evidence

that givenness might indeed not be prosodically marked in exclamatives. Repp (2020) found
that wh-exclamatives showed no reduction in the rate of accentuation in given vs. new objects.

There were only rather subtle phonetic effects of givenness in verb-second wh-exclamatives: A
reduced utterance-global maximum pitch and pitch range. Repp and Seeliger (2020) observe

for polar exclamatives a complete lack of givenness and newness marking, albeit in a study
where IS marking was not the focus of investigation. Taken together, these empirical findings
lend some support to the claim that exclamations are IS-inert, at least as far as the given-

new dimension is concerned. Repp and Seeliger (2020) suggest that this inertness is part of
the prosodic constructional default mentioned above. Givenness marking (i.e., low prosodic

prominence) is incompatible with the marking of an utterance as exclamative, which comes with

high prominences. For elements that are the default carrier of the nuclear accent, such as the
object in transitive sentences (cp. Repp's 2020 findings for wh-exclamatives), it certainly seems

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

that they must carry an accent independently of the (additional) presence of the exclamative
accent. However, these suggestions require more empirical support from diverse exclamative
structures. Regarding contrastive focus, there are no empirical investigations for questions or
exclamatives.

4. The current study
4.1. Hypotheses

Given the state of the art on the prosodic marking of IS in questions and exclamations in general,

and polar questions and polar exclamatives in particular, the current production study addresses

the issue of how given information and contrastive information are marked prosodically in
comparison to new information in these two non-assertive speech acts. We explore two hypotheses:

* H1. Givenness (vs. Newness): Questions and exclamatives differ in their propensity
for givenness marking. In questions, like in assertions, givenness is marked by reduced

prominence, which, however, is realized as higher pitch for questions with a rising
baseline. Exclamatives are information-structurally inert with respect to givenness, due to
incompatibility with the prosodic constructional default.

* H2. Contrast (vs. Newness): In questions and in exclamatives, contrast is marked by

increased prominence, like in assertions. In questions, increased prominence involves an
inverse deviation from the pitch baseline in comparison to assertions because of the rising

contour. Exclamatives should not be information-structurally inert for contrast because
the prosodic constructional default of exclamatives is fully compatible with increased
prominence(s).

We predict that increased prominence will be realized by an increased frequency of categorical

marking, and by the gradient effects of increased excursion, larger deviations from the pitch
baseline, and longer duration, which might correlate with the more frequent occurrence of more

prominent accent types, such as L+H* rather than H* for falling contours. We predict that
decreased prominence will be realized by the corresponding opposite measures.

Due to the still scarce evidence on the prosodic realization of different types of exclamatives

and certain types of questions, our study also examined IS-independent characteristics of polar
exclamatives and questions. A replication of earlier results is expected to show that exclamatives
have a low boundary tone whereas questions predominantly have a high boundary tone;

exclamatives have a slower speaking rate than questions; exclamatives contain the so-called
exclamative accent, potentially in addition to focus-marking accents, so that the number of
accents should be higher in exclamatives than in questions.

9

10

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

4.2. Materials and Design
The target sentences in the experiment were German transitive verb-first structures. They

consisted of a monosyllabic finite auxiliary verb, a monosyllabic subject d-pronoun, a disyllabic

gradable adjective or quantifier modifying the object, the disyllabic object, and a trisyllabic nonfinite lexical verb with stress on the second syllable:
(2)

Hat der
kleine Lamas gefunden
has hedpron small Llamas found

target sentence

The target sentences were embedded in a dialogue between two speakers (see (3)) so that the
context and the punctuation disambiguated the speech act, and the context disambiguated the
three IS conditions: New, contrastive or given information. In the new condition, speaker 1

introduces a hypernym of the object of the target utterance (i.e., in (3) domestic animals as a

hypernym of llamas). Speaker 2 mentions the object (only) in the target sentence. In the given
condition, speaker 1 introduces the object occurring in the target sentence by using the same
expression as in the target utterance (i.e., there is across-speaker repetition of lexical material).

In the contrastive condition, speaker 1 introduces a focus alternative to the object of the target
sentence (i.e., guinea pigs in (3)). Speaker 2 mentions this alternative, brushes it aside in their first
sentence(s), and then utters the target sentence.2

Concerning the new condition, we note that elements for which a hypernym has been

mentioned in the context have been considered to be accessible rather than new (Baumann &
Riester, 2013). However, as has also been observed (Baumann et al., 2015), the hypernym-

hyponym (superset-set) relation is sensitive to the distinction between referent vs. lexical item.

In a dialogue like A: Do you like animals? B: I like all dogs., dogs cannot be deaccented because we

cannot identify dog referents on the basis of an animal referent superset. Thus, referentially, `dogs'
are not accessible; dogs is only lexically a hyponym of animals. In comparison, when a hyponym

denotes a referent that has been introduced otherwise, there can be deaccentuation. Consider
the following sequence from Baumann & Grice (2006): Ole was a talented sportsman. He was well-

known in his region. The local press praised the tennis player. Observe that tennis player, which is

a hyponym of sportsman, can be deaccented. However, also observe that the referent of tennis

player has been introduced by the name Ole, which really is the trigger for the deaccentuation
(Baumann & Grice, 2006). In our materials, the referents of the object noun are not identifiable

on the basis of the superset (or otherwise). This is especially true because the superset always
is very large. For this reason, we are speaking of new information focus. Future research must
2

The sample item in Seeliger & Repp (2020) differs from the current, correct description: There was a local mix-up of
speaker 1/2.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

11

show if there are prosodic differences between completely `unprepared' information (which is an
option we did not choose, to ensure coherence), and information for which there is a referential
superset in the context.
(3)

Sample experimental item

Speaker 1: Polar exclamative and polar question conditions
Hast du schon die Ergebnisse von der Forschungsreise nach Sudamerika mitbekommen? Die
wollten ja in den Anden besonders kleine { NEW/CONTRASTIVE Nutztierarten,

GIVEN

Lamas} finden,

die bisher nicht beschrieben waren. Und die Leute waren echt erfolgreich. Frank zum Beispiel.

`Have you heard about the results of the research trip to South America? They went to the Andes to
look for particularly small species of {NEW/CONTRASTIVE domestic animals, GIVEN llama(s)} that hadn`t
been described previously. And they were really successful. Frank, for instance.'
New & Given:

Bei dem lief es richtig gut.
He was really lucky.

Contrast:

Der hat total winzige Meerschweinchen gefunden.
He found very tiny guinea pigs.'

Speaker 2 (participant): Polar exclamative conditions
New & Given:

Ja, total! Hat der kleine Lamas gefunden!
`Yeah, totally! (Boy!) Did he find small llamas!'

Contrast:

Na, Meerschweinchen sind doch unspektakular! Hat der kleine Lamas gefunden!
`Well, guinea pigs are unspectacular! (Boy!) Did he find small llamas!'

Echt uberraschend!
`Really surprising!'
Speaker 2 (participant): Polar question conditions
New & Given: Ach, echt? Hat der kleine Lamas gefunden?
`Oh, really? Did he find small llamas?'
Contrast:

Naja, die Meerschweinchen finde ich noch vergleichsweise unspektakular.
Aber sonst? Hat der kleine Lamas gefunden?
`Well, I think the guinea pigs are comparatively unspectacular. But otherwise?
Did he find small llamas?'

Das wurde ich spannend finden.
`I`d find that exciting.'

12

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

The experimental materials consisted of nine items in 2 x 3 conditions each, for a total of 54
recordings per participant.

The experiment also contained nine filler items in three pseudo-conditions each.3 These

fillers were included as distractors but we also used them as controls when some of the results
for the experimental items turned out to be unexpected. Therefore, we describe the fillers here
in detail and discuss some of the prosodic characteristics of the filler sentences produced by

the participants in Section 6, where we discuss the experimental results. The fillers were stringidentical in the two recording sessions but represented a different speech act in each session.
In session 1 (testing polar exclamatives), they were negative declarative questions, see (4). In

session 2 (testing polar questions), they were negative declarative sentences used as rejections,
see (5). Thus, across experimental items and fillers, each session contained a balanced number
of questions and non-questions.

The entire lexical content of the fillers was given. They could thus serve as a comparison for

the accentuation of given material in two more non-assertive speech acts.
(4)

Sample filler item: Type declarative question

Speaker 1:

Torsten ist echt dreist. Anna hatte ihre Gaste ja gebeten, statt Geschenken

Blumen mitzubringen. Aber meinst du, Torsten interessiert das? Also ich
wurde den ja nie wieder einladen.

`Torsten is really brash. As you know, Anna had asked her guests to bring flowers

instead of presents. But do you think Torsten cares about that? I for one would
never invite him again.'
Speaker 2:

Moment mal.

(participant)

`Wait a moment.'
Der

hat

keine

Blumen

mitgebracht?

hedpron

has

no

flowers

brought

target filler sentence

`He didn`t bring flowers?'
Arbeitet der nicht in einer Gartnerei?
`Doesn`t he work in a plant nursery?'

3

The pseudo-conditions were realized as small alterations of the clause following the filler target sentence (e.g., different polar questions, tag question). This avoided procedural differences between fillers and experimental items, which
were also presented three times with small variations.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

(5)

13

Sample filler item: Type rejection

Speaker 1:

Ich fand die Idee von Julia toll, dass alle ihre Gaste anstelle von Geschenken

Blumen mitbringen sollen. Das riecht hier super! Ich bin vor allem gespannt,
was Torsten so mitgebracht hat. Der arbeitet ja in einer Gartnerei.

`I loved Julia`s idea that all her guests bring flowers instead of presents. It smells so

nice in here! I`m especially looking forward to what Torsten brought. As you know,
he works in a plant nursery.'
Speaker 2:

Moment mal.

(participant) `Wait a moment.'
Der

hat

hedpron has

keine

Blumen

mitgebracht!

no

flowers

brought

target filler sentence

`He didn`t bring flowers!
Hat er dir das nicht erzahlt?
`Didn`t he tell you?'
All fillers began with Der hat keine... `He has no...', followed by the direct object and the nonfinite lexical verb. The metrical structure and segmental make-up were less controlled than in
the experimental items.

4.3 Participants
The experiment had 27 participants (mean age: 21.8, range: 18-28). All participants were female

native speakers of German who were recruited from the student population of the University of

Cologne, and were either paid or received course credit.4 The study was run in the XLinC Lab

Cologne under the laboratory ethics approval #2016-09E2-200213 by the German Linguistic
Society. Participants gave written consent.

4.4 Procedure
The recordings were made in two sessions to reduce repetitiveness and the duration of the

experimental session(s). The sessions were separated by at least six days. In session 1, the 27
exclamatives were recorded, in session 2 the 27 questions were recorded.

4

One participant of the first session is different from the set of participants reported in Seeliger and Repp (2020). She
was replaced because of a no-show for the second session. This had no impact on the significance levels.

14

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

The participants took the role of speaker 2 in the dialogs illustrated in Section 4.2. The dialogs

were presented via headphones and through accompanying text on a computer monitor. Each

dialog was preceded by a caption (e.g., A discussion at the institute for biology at a university), with
a photograph of this setting. Then the dialog between the two speakers, who were represented by
silhouettes, began. The part of speaker 1 was presented in a speech bubble and also played through
headphones. After a button press, the participants read the part of speaker 2 in another speech

bubble. Another button press started the recording. Participants could repeat their utterances

until they were satisfied with them. Another button press stopped the recording and advanced to
the next dialog. The dialogs were presented in four pseudo-random orders. Every participant saw

and recorded every dialog in every condition. We used Presentation (Neurobehavioral Systems.

https://neurobs.com/) for the presentation of the stimuli and the recordings, which were made
at a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz and a bit depth of 16 bits, using an omnidirectional DPA 4060
microphone.

4.5 Dependent variables
We investigated the following variables on the syllable level: Mean F0, maximum F0, minimum

F0, F0 excursion (F0max - F0min), duration (log-transformed), and intensity. F0 was measured in

semitones relative to 1 Hz. Across variables involving F0, we only compared accented syllables
of the same accent types.

On the utterance level, we investigated speech rate, pitch excursion, mean pitch, and intensity

(mean and range). We operationalized speech rate as the number of (underlying) syllables per
second (i.e., nine syllables divided by the total duration in seconds).

As categorical variables, we investigated accent placement, accent type, prominence levels

of accents, and boundary tones. Many syllables were accented either so often or so rarely that
there were issues with the model fit. We will note these issues below as they come up. The accent

types that we investigated were the GToBI accents (Grice et al., 2005). The prominence levels
that we investigated are those of the DIMA scheme (Kugler et al., 2015, 2019): Level 1 for weak

prominences (post-focal prominences, rhythmic accents and phrase accents), level 2 for strong
prominences (nuclear accents), and level 3 for extra-strong prominences (emphatic realizations
of nuclear accents).

4.6 Data preparation
Recordings containing slips of the tongue or deviations from the lexical materials were excluded
from the analysis (30 exclamatives and 11 questions out of a total of 1458 recordings). One
participant's recordings of the questions were discarded because of a technical error. This left
699 exclamatives and 691 questions for analysis.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Large outliers in any of the dependent variables were corrected manually if they represented

measurement or annotation errors, or were left in the data if they represented real outliers.

The recordings were annotated in Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2021) by two trained research

assistants. We used a modified version of the DIMA scheme (Kugler et al., 2015, 2019),5 using
the following tiers: Syllable boundaries, GToBI tones, prominence levels, final boundary tone.
We did not use a phrase boundary tier, since the target utterances were expected to constitute
single intonational phrases, which indeed they did. After an initial round of annotation, the
research assistants checked each other's annotations and reached a consensus for conflicts in the
annotations.

Pitch was sampled every 10 ms. We manually inspected and corrected the pitch tracks produced

by Praat, in case there were octave jump errors or spurious voicing. The summarizing statistics were
calculated directly in R (R Core Team, 2021), using R package rPraat (Boril & Skarnitzl, 2016).

There were two practical challenges regarding syllabification. First, some items contained

sequences of liquids and/or nasals that resulted in the frequent reduction of the number of realized
syllables (e.g., /n/  []). When this happened, we annotated the unrealized syllable such

that it only covered the final period of the nasal. The resulting bimodal distribution of syllable

durations allowed us to treat unrealized syllables (and syllables preceding them) differently.
Second, potentially ambisyllabic consonants (e.g., /m/ in /hm/), were treated as the onset of
the subsequent syllable: /h.m/, to ensure annotation consensus.

5. Results
For the statistical analysis, we fitted linear mixed models (or generalized linear mixed models, if

applicable) using R packages lme4 (Bates, Machler, Bolker, & Walker, 2015) and afex (Singmann,
Bolker, Westfall, Aust, & Ben-Shachar, 2021). The p-values were obtained using R package

lmerTest (Kuznetsova, 2017), using the Kenward-Roger method for computing the degrees of
freedom. The utterance-level measures were analyzed using LMMs with two predictors: Object
Status and Speech Act. The measures related to accent placement and accent type were

analyzed using binomial GLMMs (logit-link) with one predictor (Object Status). The syllablelevel measures were analyzed with LMMs with one predictor (Object Status).

For model selection, we started with the maximal model (Matuschek, Kliegl, Vasishth,

Baayen, & Bates, 2017), reducing the random structure in case of convergence issues. Below, we

describe each model's final random effects structure alongside its coefficients using the following

shorthand(s): An intercept-only model contains no random slopes. A maximal model contains
by-subject random slopes for all predictors, but (except for one model) not a random slope
5

Our annotation used the tone labels of GToBI (Grice et al., 2005) instead of the more theory-neutral H and L labels
of DIMA (Kugler et al., 2015).

15

16

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

for the interaction of predictors. For non-maximal models with random slopes, we indicate the

particular random by-subject slopes with subscripts: OS (Object Status), SA (Speech Act),
OS+SA (both factors), OS*SA (interaction).

The models with the single predictor Object Status were treatment-coded with New objects

as the baseline. Two-predictor models (for the utterance-level measures) were fitted with sum
coding for two subsets of the data: One subset containing the utterances with new and contrastive

objects, and one subset containing the utterances with new and given objects. The reason is that
a model with sum-coded 3 x 2 factors does not test our hypotheses because the baseline, which

is the overall grand mean across speech acts and object statuses, is not theoretically meaningful.
A 2 x 2 comparison is symmetric and allows more straightforward conclusions about the factors'

main effects. We report Holm-Bonferroni corrected p-values for the Speech Act comparisons.

Effect sizes for the utterance-level measures are given for questions and for utterances with nonnew objects (i.e., contrastive objects in the New vs. Contrast model, and given objects in the
New vs. Given model).

5.1. Utterance-level measures
Figure 1 shows the means of the utterance-level measures.

Figure 1: Utterance-level acoustic measures. Means are marked by diamonds.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Mean pitch. There was an effect of Speech Act in both models: Mean pitch was higher

in questions than in exclamatives (New vs. Contrast modelSA+OS: b = 1.18, SE = 0.1,

t = 11.5, p < 0.001; New vs. Given modelSA: b = 1.3, SE = 0.1, t = 11, p < 0.001).

There was also an effect for the New vs. Contrastive comparison (b = -0.23, SE = 0.04,
t = -5.7, p < 0.001), which was involved in an interaction with Speech Act (b = -0.07,
SE = 0.03, t = 2.2, p < 0.05): Mean pitch was lower in utterances with Contrastive

than with New objects, and the effect was more pronounced in questions than in
exclamatives.

Pitch range. There was an effect of Speech Act in both models: Pitch range was higher in

questions than in exclamatives (New vs. Contrast modelSA+OS: b = 1.7, SE = 0.18, t = 9.6,

p < 0.001; New vs. Given modelSA: b = 2.3, SE = 0.22, t = 10.8, p < 0.001). Additionally,
there was an effect of Contrastive focus (b = 0.54, SE = 0.1, t = 5.4, p < 0.001), which was

involved in an interaction (b = -0.57, SE = 0.07, t = -8.4, p < 0.001): Contrastive focus led to
a higher pitch range, but only in exclamatives.

Mean intensity. Mean intensity did not show significant differences for either Object

Status or Speech Act, only tendencies. Descriptively, mean intensity tended to be lower for

questions (New vs. Contrast modelSA*OS: b = -1.9, SE = 0.9, t = -2, p < 0.2; New vs. Given
modelSA+OS: b = -1.8, SE = 0.9, t = -1.9, p < 0.2) and for utterances containing contrastive
objects (b = -0.14, SE = 0.08, t = -1.9, p < 0.1).

Intensity range. Intensity range did not exhibit significant differences for Object Status.

As for Speech Act, intensity range was lower in questions than in exclamatives in both models

(New vs. Contrast modelSA+OS: b = -1.3, SE = 0.2, t = -8.7, p < 0.001; New vs. Given
modelSA+OS: b = -1, SE = 0.2, t = -5.6, p < 0.001).

Syllables per second. There was an effect of Speech Act in both models: Speaking

rate was higher in questions than in exclamatives (New vs. Contrast modelSA+OS: b = 0.36,
SE = 0.03, t = 11.3, p < 0.001; New vs. Given modelSA: b = 0.36, SE = 0.03, t = 11.2,

p < 0.001). There were no significant differences for Object Status and no significant
interactions.

We assume that most of the significant differences on the utterance level can be traced to

differences on the syllable level or to other local effects. For instance, if most questions ended in a

final rise/high boundary tone, pitch range might be higher in questions than in exclamatives just
because of the boundary tone. Similarly, pitch range in exclamatives containing a contrastively
focused object might well be higher than in exclamatives containing a new object because the
nuclear accent on the object is more prominent than in the other two conditions (i.e., without

pitch range on all syllables being higher). We return to this issue after the investigation of accent

placement in Section 5.3, since accent placement determines which acoustic comparisons can be
made.

17

18

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

5.2. Final boundary tone
In the following, we will speak of high boundary tones and/or final rises if the boundary tone is
H-^H% or L-H%, and of low boundary tones and/or final falls if the boundary tone is L-%.

The difference between the speech acts in terms of boundary tones was very stark:

Questions overwhelmingly ended with a high boundary tone (i.e., a final rise), and exclamatives

overwhelmingly ended with a low boundary tone (i.e., a final fall). Exceptions were few: 10 out
of 699 exclamatives were rising, and nine out of 691 questions were falling.

5.3. Accentuation patterns
Figures 2 and 3 show the accentuation of stressed syllables in the words of the target sentences,
split by GToBI accent types and annotated prominence levels. More prominent accents are
represented by darker colors. Note that these data are pooled across all utterances (i.e., the

figures do not show which accents co-occurred within the same utterance). We return to the
latter issue further below (for accent types see Section 5.3.1; for perceived prominence levels see
Section 5.3.2).

Figure 2: Distribution of accented syllables in the exclamatives.
The most salient patterns in Figures 2 and 3 are as follows: (i) In both speech acts, the

most frequent accent carrier was the object, (ii) the d-pronoun very often carried an accent in
exclamatives, but virtually never in questions, (iii) the clause-final lexical verb quite frequently

carried an accent in questions, but almost never in exclamatives, (iv) with very few exceptions,

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Figure 3: Distribution of accented syllables in the questions.
L* accents occurred only in questions. Furthermore, the auxiliary appears to be able to carry an

accent only in exclamatives, while the adjective/quantifier6 may carry an accent in both speech
acts, although it did so more often in questions than in exclamatives.

The influence of IS and speech act on accent placement can be summarized as follows: (v) In

both speech acts, the IS status of the object has a comparatively small impact on the accentuation
of the object itself, and a comparatively larger impact on the accentuation of one other element:

The d-pronoun in exclamatives, and the adjective in questions, (vi) contrastive focus leads to

high accentuation rates on the object and to low accentuation rates on the respective non-object
element, (vii) in questions with a given object, the object is accented slightly less often than in

questions with a new object, whereas the accentuation rate of the adjective is slightly higher in
questions with a given, than a new object.

5.3.1. Accent placement and accent type
To quantify the influence of IS on accent placement, we fitted five models with the presence of an
accent on a syllable as the dependent variable: For the objects of exclamatives, for the objects of

questions, for the d-pronoun subjects of exclamatives, for the adjectives in questions, and for the
lexical verbs in questions. The predictor was the IS status of the object. Recall that these models
are treatment-coded with New objects as baseline.

6

In the following, we use adjective for these prenominal elements.

19

20

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Objects in exclamatives were accented more often when the object was Contrastive than

when it was New (intercept-only model: b = 1.8, SE = 0.6, z = 3.1, p < 0.01). There was no

significant difference between New and Given objects. Objects in questions were also accented
more often when the object was Contrastive than when it was New (intercept-only model: b =
3.1, SE = 1, z = 2.9, p < 0.01). Given objects in questions were accented less often than New
objects, but not to a significant extent (b = -0.7, SE = 0.4, z = -1.9, p = 0.053).
D-pronouns

in

exclamatives

were

accented

less

often

when

the

object

was

Contrastive than when it was New (intercept-only model: b = -2.5, SE = 0.3, z = -8.7,

p < 0.001). Adjectives in questions were also accented less often when the object was
Contrastive than when it was New (intercept-only model: b = -2.6, SE = 0.5, z = -5.2, p <
0.001), and more often when the object was Given than when it was New (b = 0.8, SE = 0.27,

z = 3, p < 0.01).

Lexical verbs in questions were accented less often in utterances with Contrastive objects

than in utterances with New objects, but not to a significant extent.

We also fitted three models investigating accent type choice: The choice of L+H* rather

than H* on the objects of exclamatives, the choice of L* vs. high starred tones on the objects

of questions, and the choice of L+H* vs. H* on the d-pronoun subject of exclamatives. L+H*

accents in exclamatives were more frequent on Contrastive objects and less frequent on
Given objects, both relative to New objects (maximal model: Contrast - b = 3.3, SE =
0.5, z = 6.6, p < 0.001, Given - b = -0.7, SE = 0.3, z = -2.1, p < 0.05). There were no

significant differences regarding the object accents in questions: L* accents were roughly

equally frequent in all conditions. L+H* accents on the d-pronoun subjects of exclamatives
were slightly less frequent when the object of the utterance was Contrastive than when it

was New, without reaching significance (intercept-only model: b = -0.55, SE = 0.3, z =
-1.7, p = 0.09).

In summary, contrastive focus on the object led to a significant increase in the number

of accented realizations of the object in both exclamatives and questions. In exclamatives, there

was also a significant increase in the number of L+H* accents. One other element was accented
significantly less often in both speech acts when the object was contrastive: The d-pronoun in

exclamatives, and the adjective in questions. Differences between New and Given information

were found for the accent choice on objects of exclamatives (L+H* was less common on Given
objects than on New objects), and for accent placement on adjectives in questions (they were

accented more often when the object was Given than when it was New). Crucially, however,
there were no significant differences between New and Given objects in terms of accentuation
rate of the object noun (i.e., in the measure that was a priori expected to be most likely to show
evidence of deaccentuation of given objects).

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

5.3.2. Perceived prominence
The patterns of perceived prominence can only be summarized descriptively, since the data are

very imbalanced. For the exclamatives we found that under contrastive focus, most object

accents had prominence level 2, while New and Given objects were much more likely to carry
accents of prominence level 1 (mostly H*). The d-pronoun shows a complementary picture:
The (comparatively few) accents that occurred when the object was contrastively focused were

mostly prominence level 1. In the New and Given conditions, the d-pronoun was more likely to
carry accents of prominence level 2 (of varying accent types). These patterns match those for the
accentuation rates that we just saw.

In questions, the prominence level of the object showed little sensitivity to its IS status: The

vast majority of object accents were of prominence level 2, regardless of IS. Thus, the nuclear
accent in questions regularly occurred on the object. As already mentioned, the type of accent
did not show a sensitivity to IS, either.

Finally, the lexical verb in questions was nearly always of level 1 when it was accented,

regardless of the IS status of the object.

5.3.3. Contours: Combinations of accent types and combinations of prominence levels
We next turn to the issue of which accented syllables tended to co-occur in one utterance. Figure 4

shows the most common accent type combinations (i.e., contours) by experimental condition.
Figure 5 shows examples for the two most common contours in each speech act.

Figure 4: Percentage of contours within conditions per speech act. The question contours are
ordered top-to-bottom by occurrence rate; the exclamative contours are roughly ranked by
(presumed) cumulative prominence: Double L+H* accents > combinations of one L+H* accent
and one H* accent > double H* accents > single H* accents. DSub = subject d-pronoun; Other
= contours occurring in fewer than 5%, pooled.

21

22

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Figure 5: Example contours for the two most common contour types in each speech act. Top:
Exclamatives. Bottom: Questions. Each utterance was produced by a different participant.
Gloss/Translation of the example: Has he wild bulls ridden; Has he ridden wild bulls'.
Exclamatives exhibited a greater variety of contour types than questions, and they also had

more contours with multiple prominences. In questions, the most common contour type in each

condition was a single L* accent on the object. In both speech acts, Contrastive focus led to

an increase of single accents on the object (i.e., to a reduction of accentuation elsewhere in
the utterance). For exclamatives, this means that the accent on the d-pronoun, which in the
New and Given conditions regularly occurs as a second accent, is present less frequently in the
Contrastive condition. The single accent was the more prominent L+H* accent.

Figure 6 shows the co-occurrence of accented syllables by prominence levels. The top facets

illustrate the competition for prosodic prominence between the object and the d-pronoun in

exclamatives that we saw above from another perspective: When the object was New or Given,
the additional accent on the d-pronoun was more often more prominent than the accent on the

object (level 2 vs. 1). This suggests that it was the nuclear accent in almost half of the utterances.
In exclamatives with Contrastive objects, the object had a higher prominence than the accent
on the d-pronoun (when it was not the only accent anyway).

5.4. Syllable-level measures
We now turn to the continuous measures on the syllable level. For the pitch-related variables
maximum pitch, minimum pitch, and pitch range, we divided the data into subsets according

to the respective syllable's starred tone: We pooled syllables carrying H* and L+H* accents,
and syllables carrying L* and L*+H accents.7 For the two variables that are not related
7

L*+H accents did not occur in the experimental items, only in the fillers (Section 6.2).

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Figure 6: Percentage of prominence level combinations within conditions per speech act. See
caption of Figure 5 for abbreviations.
to pitch - intensity and duration - we pooled all accented syllables regardless of GToBI
accent. The theoretical motivation for these subsets is that our hypotheses regarding the
impact of the IS status of the object on its prosodic characteristics only differentiate between

high/rising and low/falling accents, instead of between specific GToBI types within these

broader groups. An additional, practical motivation is that the choice of GToBI accent
and the IS status of the object were correlated, as described in Section 5.3. For example,
H* accents were quite rare on contrastively focused objects in exclamatives, while L+H*

accents were rare in the other two conditions. Such imbalance produces issues with
model fits.

We investigated maximum pitch only for syllables with high starred tones and minimum

pitch only for syllables with low starred tones. We investigated pitch range for both types

of starred tones. High starred tones occurred both in exclamatives (on the object and on the
d-pronoun) and in questions (on the object). Low starred tones occurred only in questions (on
the object and on the lexical verb).

In the following, we will discuss the results by syllable and speech act, starting with the

object in both speech acts.

5.4.1. Object: Exclamatives & Questions
Table 1 shows the sample sizes underlying the statistics for the object. Table 2 further below
summarizes the acoustic measures.

23

24

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Exclamative

Question

H*

L+H*

H* & L+H*

L*

Unaccented

New

144

64

208

0

19

Contrast

48

180

228

6

4

Given

166

50

216

0

18

New

11

58

69

144

16

Contrast

4

62

66

163

1

Given

18

58

76

128

28

Table 1: Number of objects by condition and GToBI accent type. The sample sizes underlying the
inferential statistics are in boldface.
Exclamatives. In exclamatives, maximum pitch on objects with a high starred tone was

higher when the object was Contrastive than when it was New (intercept-only model: b = 2.6,
SE = 0.2, t = 11.2, p < 0.001), and it was lower when the object was Given than when it was
New, although not significantly so (b = -0.39, SE = 0.23, t = -1.6, p = 0.1).

Objects with high starred tones in exclamatives also had a larger pitch excursion when the

object was Contrastive than when it was New (intercept-only model: b = 4.1, SE = 0.24, t =

17.2, p < 0.001), while Given objects had a smaller pitch excursion than New objects, although
not significantly so (b = -0.4, SE = 0.24, t = -1.7, p = 0.1).

Finally, Contrastive objects in exclamatives differed from New objects both in duration

and intensity: they were both significantly longer (intercept-only model, log transformed

dependent variable: b = 0.14, SE = 0.015, t = 9.6, p < 0.001) and louder (maximal model:
b = 1.05, SE = 0.3, t = 3.3, p < 0.01) than New objects.

Questions. The stressed syllable in objects in questions was unique in that it occurred

both with high and with low starred pitch accents often enough to be analyzable with mixed
models. Maximum pitch for objects with high starred tones was significantly lower when the

object was Contrastive than when it was New (intercept-only model: b = -1.1, SE = 0.38,

t = -2.9, p < 0.01). On objects with low starred tones, minimum pitch was significantly
lower when the object was Contrastive than when it was New (intercept-only model: b =

-0.47, SE = 0.14, t = -3.2, p < 0.01). There were no significant differences in the pitch range
of high-starred or low-starred accents between any of the conditions. Low-starred objects

numerically showed the lowest pitch range when New, with Given and Contrastive objects
somewhat higher.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

25

There were no significant differences for duration or intensity for objects in questions.
Speech act

Accent New
type

Contrastive
(vs. new)

Given
(vs. new)

Max. F0

Exclamative

High

95.0

(2.7)

97.5

(3.3)

***

94.5

(2.5)

(st)

Question

High

101.2

(3.0)

100.1

(3.8)

**

101.2

(3.3)

Min. F0 (st)

Question

Low

89.5

(2.1)

88.96

(2.1)

**

89.7

(2.0)

F0 range

Exclamative

High

3.3

(2.7)

7.4

(3.8)

***

2.9

(2.1)

(st)

Question

High

9 .0

(4.0)

9.2

(3.7)

8.3

(4.2)

Question

Low

3.5

(2.0)

3.8

(2.3)

3.6

(2.3)

Duration

Exclamative

pooled

208.7

(75.6)

240.8

(83.4)

207.8

(70.8)

(ms)

Question

pooled

201.1

(65.8)

199.6

(68.8)

200.4

(64.3)

Intensity

Exclamative

pooled

60.1

(8.0)

61.5

(8.1)

60.2

(8.0)

(dB)

Question

pooled

56.6

(7.2)

56.6

(7.3)

57.0

(7.4)

***

**

Table 2: Means (and standard deviations) for the acoustic measures for the accented syllable of
objects by speech act and accent type. Significant differences are in boldface. Asterisks indicate
significance levels (***: p < 0.001; **: p < 0.01, *: p < 0.05).

5.4.2. D-pronoun: Exclamatives
Turning to the d-pronoun subject, which was frequently accented in exclamatives (with a

frequency reduction in utterances with contrastive focus; the accent always involving a high

starred tone, Section 5.3), we found that maximum pitch was lower for the d-pronoun when the
object was Contrastive (intercept-only model: b = -1, SE = 0.2, t = -5.2, p < 0.001). There
was no difference between the maximum pitch of d-pronouns in New vs. Given utterances.

D-pronouns in exclamatives had lower pitch range when the object of the utterance was

Contrastive (intercept-only model: b = -0.4, SE = 0.15, t = -2.8, p < 0.01). There was no
difference in the pitch range of d-subjects in New vs. Given utterances.

The duration of d-pronouns in exclamatives containing a Contrastive object was shorter

than that of d-pronouns in exclamatives with New objects (maximal model, log-transformed

dependent variable: b = -0.16, SE = 0.03, t = -4.8, p < 0.001). There were no differences in
intensity. Table 3 summarizes the acoustic measures.

26

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

New

Contrastive (vs. new)

Given (vs. new)

Maximum F0 (st)

96.2

(2.3)

95.4

(1.9)

***

96.2

(2.4)

Pitch range (st)

2.7

(1.6)

2.3

(1.2)

**

2.77

(1.6)

Duration (ms)

235.5

(61.2)

213.8

(68.5)

***

234.5

(63.8)

Mean intensity (dB)

62.2

(8.1)

61.8

(8.3)

62.1

(8.2)

Table 3: Means (and standard deviations) for the acoustic measures of d-pronouns in exclamatives
(high starred tones). For the mark-up, see Table 2.

5.4.3. Lexical verb: Questions
Finally turning to the other syllable in questions which carried L* accents often enough to be
analyzable with mixed models - the clause-final lexical verb - we found that Contrastive

focus on the object led to a significantly lower pitch minimum (intercept-only model: b = -0.5,
SE = 0.24, t = -2, p < 0.05). There were no other significant differences in any of the measures.

Table 4 gives an overview.

New

Contrastive (vs. new)

Given (vs. new)
91.6

(2.3)

Minimum F0 (st)

91.4

(1.7)

90.8

(1.8)

*

Pitch range (st)

2.9

(2.7)

3.0

(2.7)

2.7

(2.5)

Duration (ms)

237.6

(88.7)

245.0

(88.7)

243.0

(88.9)

Mean intensity (dB)

53.6

(7.5)

53

(8.1)

53.6

(8.0)

Table 4: Means (and standard deviations) for the acoustic measures of lexical verbs in questions
(L* accents). For the mark-up, see Table 2.

6. Discussion
Our study set out to investigate the prosodic marking of given and contrastive information in
comparison to new information in two non-assertive speech acts: Polar exclamatives and polar
questions. Before we discuss our results pertaining to this goal, we note that our study replicated

almost all earlier findings on speech act marking: (i) Questions were almost exclusively realized
with a high boundary tone and thus a rising contour, and exclamatives with a low boundary tone

and thus a falling contour; (ii) questions were spoken faster than exclamatives; (iii) exclamatives
contained an exclamative accent on the d-pronoun (also in addition to [contrastive] accents
on the object). The observation that the subject d-pronoun was the only main attractor of an
accent in the clause-initial region is surprising given that Repp and Seeliger (2020) found the

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

clause-initial finite auxiliary to be a frequent attractor of the exclamative accent. We propose

that this discrepancy results from a competition between the two attractors. The structures tested
by Repp and Seeliger (2020) contained either an auxiliary or a d-pronoun, but never both. The

structures tested here always contained both. Since both elements are adjacent, it seems unlikely
that they both carry a prominent accent, purely for rhythmic reasons. Our results indicate

that the d-pronoun is the preferred exponent of the exclamative accent for most participants.
Hence, accents on the auxiliary are rare if a d-pronoun is also present. Note that one participant
consistently placed an accent on the auxiliary rather than on the d-pronoun. We thus have some
evidence that accents on the auxiliary and on the d-pronoun are mutually exclusive because they
are adjacent in these structures.

In the following we discuss the marking of IS, starting with contrast and then moving on to

givenness.

6.1. Contrast: Prenuclear effects, nuclear effects, and phonological categories
Contrastive focus largely was marked as expected, although there were also some important
unexpected results. As hypothesized (H.2), contrastive focus led to increased prosodic prominence
in both speech acts. We found more frequent accentuation of the focused object in both speech

acts, and a significant increase in the number of L+H* accents in exclamatives. We also found
phonetic differences indicating increased prominence: Contrastive objects in questions were
characterized by lower pitch, while in exclamatives, they were associated with higher pitch,
larger pitch excursions, and longer durations.

The most important unexpected finding was that in utterances with a contrastive object,

an element that in non-contrastive utterances was prosodically prominent - the d-pronoun in
exclamatives and the adjective in questions - was no longer as prominent. There were much

fewer accents on these two elements when the object was contrastive. Thus, contrast was not
only marked by prominence increase but also by prominence decrease. Another unexpected
finding was the lacking duration effect for contrast marking in questions. This is curious. Possibly
the high speaking rate of questions made the durations of individual syllables fairly rigid.
Overall, our results show two important things.
(i) Contrast marking is characterized on the one hand by categorical prosodic patterns (accent
placement, accent type). Some of these are used probabilistically, similar to what has been

reported for categorical patterns for the choice of accent type in givenness and focus marking
in assertions (Rohr & Baumann, 2010; Mucke & Grice, 2014; Baumann et al., 2015; Grice

et al., 2017; Roessig & Mucke, 2019; Roessig, 2021). On the other hand, contrast marking
is done with gradient patterns, like the pitch-related measures. Both types of patterns differ
depending on the speech act, which itself also is marked by both types of patterns.

27

28

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

(ii) Contrast marking occurs both locally - by a prominence increase on the contrastive
element -, and non-locally - by a prominence decrease on another, prenuclear element.

Both (i) and (ii) raise important issues for the prosody-meaning interface. Regarding (i),

the observation that both phonological and phonetic patterns are used to mark contrast and

speech act, and that they do so inter-dependently suggests that the often assumed division
of prosody-meaning mapping by meaning type is not supported by our data. We did not find

that syntactic and (discourse-)semantic information, being part of the grammar, maps onto
phonological categories which via the phonology-phonetics interface are implemented in the

phonetics, whereas pragmatic or paralinguistic information has a direct interface with the
phonetics.8

We think that a view like that taken by Grice et al. (2017, p. 105), who describe phonology

and phonetics as "two sides of the same coin, best understood as a single system", is more

likely to adequately capture the phonetics-phonology-meaning relation. Consider our findings

regarding the relationship between L+H* as a phonological category and contrast: (a) In
exclamatives, contrast increased the number of L+H* accents on objects, but L+H* accents

were also found on new or even given objects; (b) many L+H* accents in exclamatives were
found on the d-pronoun, which was never contrastive and always given. Thus, the relationship

between L+H* and contrast is probabilistic. Contrast is neither necessary nor sufficient to
license the occurrence of L+H*. Considering the relationship of L+H* and speech act, the same
probabilistic characteristic emerges. L+H* is not reliably used as the exclamative accent to mark
the speech act, but it occurs often.

The acoustic properties of L+H* and H* accents also lie along a continuum (Grice et al.,

2017; Roessig, 2021). It seems that an accent with a high target is perceived as L+H* if the

target is high and/or late enough. What counts as "enough" most likely is different between

individuals, both for speakers and for hearers: Some speakers choose between L+H* vs. H* to
mark an information-structural difference, whereas others mark the same difference by gradient
differences within an accent type (Grice et al., 2017).

In sum, we think that at least in the case of L+H* and H* in German, it is inappropriate

to speak of phonological categories (i.e., tonemes). There is no categorical distinction between

the distribution of L+H* and H* accents as meaning-distinguishing. The labels H* and L+H*
are probably best viewed as shorthand descriptors of particular F0 contours, but these represent

8

Even the division into meaning types probably is too simplistic. Speech acts obviously are pragmatic entities, but how
they are related to sentence types (a syntactic category), and whether the speech act type must be encoded also in
the syntax and in the semantics are much-debated issues. For IS, it is uncontroversial that it has both semantic and
pragmatic repercussions (Krifka, 2008).

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

idealized end points of a continuum. Real productions of either accent type will probably always
lie somewhere in between these endpoints (cp. Cangemi & Grice, 2016).9

Turning to the issue arising from observation (ii), we may ask whether the F0 contours

just mentioned can be viewed as clearly meaning-distinguishing in the context of the current

study. The answer is that this is probably not the case: Apart from prominence-increasing local
marking, there often (also) is non-local prominence-decreasing marking. Thus, it does not always
seem to be sufficient to have a prominence increase on the contrastive element.

The combination of prominence increase and prominence decrease is of course familiar

from focus marking, where there is increased prominence on a focused element and reduced
prominence in the post-focal region, viz. post-focal compression, which in assertions is realized

as lower pitch in many languages. The lower pitch has been analyzed as deaccentuation (Ladd,
1980; for German, e.g., Fery, 1993) but also as a result of a reduced pitch register (Kugler

& Fery, 2017; for American English, see Xu & Xu, 2005, who explicitly argue against postfocal deaccentuation). In our experiments, the reduction of prominence occurs in the prenuclear
region. Baumann et al. (2006) also observe that there may be deaccentuation and reduced
gradient prominence in the prenuclear region in sentences with corrective focus. Niebuhr et al.

(2010) observe prenuclar deaccentuation in double-checking declarative questions, where the

nuclear accent also marks narrow focus. Kugler and Fery (2017) suggest that in the prenuclear

region there is no deaccentuation, but at most slight compression. Yet, similarly to Baumann et

al. (2006) and Niebuhr et al. (2010), we did observe a significant drop in accent frequency if the
object was contrastive, contradicting Kugler and Fery's conjecture.

The reduction of accentuation of the d-pronoun requires closer scrutiny. After all, it is a

speech-act-marking device in exclamatives without a contrastive object, and therefore might

be considered to carry a high functional load. Importantly, the constructional prosodic default

suggested by Repp and Seeliger (2020) only requires that there be a highly prominent accent

in an exclamative, without specifying the position of that accent. So deaccenting the d-pronoun
is compatible with the constructional default as long as there is a highly prominent accent
elsewhere, for instance on the contrastive object.

Having established that contrast in both speech acts is marked by a combination of prominence

increase and decrease, and that this is compatible with earlier observations in the literature, let us
ask what this finding tells us about the meaning-prosody mapping. We might describe our finding

in terms of what we may call prominence balance. This balance must be positive for the meaning
9

An interesting question in this connection is whether other accent types exhibit (nearly) categorical restrictions on
their distributions. Prima facie, this seems to be the case. For example, there were vanishingly few L* accents in
exclamatives. However, they were all produced in the few exclamatives with rising contours, which is the contour
where L* also occurred in questions. So, L* might not distinguish meanings but there may well be a structural motivation for its use: If the pitch baseline is high and rising on the utterance level, an accent must deviate downward.

29

30

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

category contrast, which means that contrast increases the prominence for the contrastively

focused word, while at the same time potentially reducing the prominence of other potentially
accented words.10 The prominence balance is negative for the meaning category givenness (see

next section): An element that is given comes with reduced prominence whereas other elements
in the clause might come with a prominence increase.

Prominence balance is fed by many different ingredients (pitch, duration, gradient phonetic

measures `feeding' into accent type etc.). An important question is what `kind of animal'

prominence balance is. One option is to assume a phonetic-phonological optimality-theoretic
account as has been proposed for segmental phonology by Flemming (2001), with constraints

over phonetic detail and with constraints making reference to the maximization of phonological
contrasts/distinctiveness. Let us assume that we have only few phonological contrasts in

intonation (cp. Gussenhoven, 1984). One such contrast could be between prominent vs. nonprominent elements as signaling contrastive focus vs. non-focus. The reduction of prominence on
the d-pronoun would maximize the distinctiveness of this d-pronoun from the highly prominent

contrastive object, thus ensuring a positive prominence balance for the contrastive object. These
ideas obviously need careful discussion in future research because prominence is of course

gradient, and information-structural meaning categories have been associated with different
degrees of prominence.

An optimality-theoretic account would also have the advantage of being able to capture the

non-deterministic mapping from a meaning category to prominence balance more generally: The
mapping seems to be more like a `wish-list,' for two reasons. The first is that the requirements of

different meaning categories might conflict with each other. We found that contrast marking can

`overwrite' speech-act specific default accent positions in exclamatives. This is possible because
of the flexibility of the `wish-list' for exclamative speech act marking (the constructional prosodic
default), which does not prescribe a position for the `exclamative accent'. The second reason is
that there are other lexical elements in the clause with their own requirements concerning their

prominence balance, which might also conflict, for instance if there is a double focus. In the
next section we will see another instance of conflicting requirements stemming from discoursesemantic restrictions.

An alternative way to view prominence balance is in terms of a gestalt strategy. Different

gestalts would then be associated with different information-structural categories. This idea
requires careful thought about the compatibility of gestalts with the auto-segmental theory we

10

Regarding prominence reduction in the prenuclear region, this idea is compatible with the observation that in comprehension the height of an accent towards the beginning of an utterance influences the perception of a later accent
in the same utterance (Ladd, Verhoeven, & Jacobs, 1994): The perceived prominence of a very prominent late accent
is reduced by the increased high prominence of an early accent.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

are assuming here. All these considerations raise many important theoretical questions and must
be addressed in greater detail in future research.

6.2. Givenness: Speech-act specific findings and a semantic-pragmatic account
Our hypothesis regarding the marking of givenness (H1) was borne out for exclamatives but
not for questions: In neither speech act was givenness clearly marked prosodically, neither

on the categorical scale of accentuation, nor on the continuous scales of pitch and duration.

For questions, we hypothesized given objects to be accented less often than new objects, to
be shorter, and to have higher pitch. What we found was that givenness leads only to a slight,

statistically non-significant reduction in the number of accents and to no significant differences
in the continuous measures. A lack of givenness marking was expected for the exclamatives,

but not for the questions. We do not think that this outcome is a consequence of the hypernymhyponym relation of the new objects with an element in the context, which we argued in Section
4.2 to be insufficient to make new objects accessible from a discourse-semantic perspective.
Furthermore, in our data new objects are regularly accented. This is expected. It is the regular
accentuation of given objects that is surprising.

To investigate this surprising outcome, we examined the accentuation patterns in the fillers.

Recall that these were negative rejections and negative declarative questions like Der hat keine
Blumen mitgebracht!/? `He didn't bring flowers !/?'. In both speech acts, all referring expressions

including the objects were lexically given. The only non-given words were the auxiliary and the
negative determiner keine `no'.11 If given objects are also accented very often in the fillers, our

experimental paradigm might be fundamentally flawed. Note that neither declarative questions
nor rejections require their lexical contents to be all given: Both can theoretically also contain

contrastive focus. All-given declarative questions and rejections thus represent the same `special'
case that all-given exclamatives and polar questions do.

Figure 7 shows the number of accented syllables in the negative rejections and the negative

declarative questions, split by accent type and prominence level. We see that there were differences
between the speech acts regarding object accentuation. The negative declarative questions pattern
with the positive polar questions from the experimental items: The object, although given, was

accented in the vast majority of utterances (92%).12 These accents virtually always represented
11

12

A reviewer suggests that the auxiliary is non-given only in the negative questions. We consider it an empirically open
question to what extent a function word like an auxiliary can be given or non-given. Importantly, this difference
between the questions and the rejections in the fillers cannot account for the difference in accentuation rates of the
auxiliary: We would expect the non-given auxiliary in questions to be accented more often than the given one in
exclamatives, contrary to the findings.
The two question types also pattern alike regarding the boundary tones: 98% of the declarative questions had high
boundary tones. As for the rejections, 96% had low boundary tones.

31

32

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

the nuclear accent, being at least of prominence level 2. In the rejections, in comparison, objects

were accented in only 19% of the utterances, and roughly half of those accents are of prominence
level 1, (i.e., post-nuclear accents). Given objects in rejections were thus mostly deaccented. We

can therefore exclude the possibility that the participants simply always placed `default' accents
on objects, regardless of IS: We do find categorical deaccentuation in rejections.

Figure 7: Distribution of accented syllables in the fillers.
Our account of the differences in givenness marking across the four speech acts rests on the

assumption that prosodic constituents must be headed (Selkirk, 1984). The default prosodic head

of the intonation phrase in the target sentences (in an all-new context) is the stressed syllable of
the object noun: It carries the nuclear accent. If IS requires that the object noun be deaccented
due to its givenness, another syllable in the intonation phrase must become the head of the phrase

and thus carry the nuclear accent. Importantly, the nuclear accent cannot just go anywhere: An
accent shift can and usually will have semantic and pragmatic effects. In the following, we use

the term accent shift instead of deaccentuation in order to emphasize that the nuclear accent has
to move elsewhere if it `cannot stay' in its default position. Crucially, we suggest that if accent
shift is semantically or pragmatically illicit, the nuclear accent must be realized even on `fully'

given elements (i.e., on given elements that are not (contrastively) focused). We propose that the

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

dialogue contexts in the experiment did not allow an accent shift in the polar questions and in the

declarative questions for specific semantic-pragmatic reasons. In the rejections, however, accent
shift was possible, and we found that speakers considered it close to mandatory.

To develop our account, let us first consider the element(s) that the accent could be shifted

to in the negative declarative questions and in the negative rejections in the fillers. We saw
that the object's main competitor for prosodic prominence is a different word in the two speech

acts. In the declarative questions, the negative determiner keine `no' is accented just a little less
frequently than the object. In the rejections, by far the most prominent syllable is the auxiliary,

which is accented in about 90% of the utterances and virtually always carries the nuclear accent.
Now, accenting the negative determiner in the declarative questions seems intuitive if we assume

that what is marked is focus on the negation (i.e., on the polarity of the sentence). The polarity

(i.e., truth) is at issue in the discourse. Accenting the finite auxiliary in the rejections serves

the same purpose: We propose that it marks verum focus (i.e., also focus on the polarity of the

utterance (e.g., Hohle, 1992; Romero & Han, 2004; Gutzmann, 2012; Lohnstein, 2012, 2016)).
Since neither the negative determiner in the declarative questions nor the auxiliary in the
rejections represent given information, a shifted accent on these elements also seems legitimate

from the point of view of givenness. An interesting question is why the two filler speech acts show

different accentuation patterns: Both regarding the choice of negative determiner vs. auxiliary,
and regarding the accentuation of the given object. Why do rejections behave in a unique fashion
and allow deaccentuation of the given object?

Before we answer these questions, let us turn to the polar questions in the experimental

items. There is only one candidate for an accent shift away from the given object: The auxiliary.
All other words were also lexically given, and a nuclear accent on any one of them with attendant
deaccentuation of the object would have indicated narrow focus on that word, which would

have been incoherent in the context. Yet, why was the auxiliary not accented? After all, positive

polar questions ask about the polarity just as negative declarative questions do, and if there is
no negative marker which could be accented to signal focus on the polarity, verum focus in
principle should be licensed.

Our explanation for the lack of accent shift in the polar questions and the declarative questions

builds on the precise pragmatic effects that verum focus has in questions. In the literature,
different effects have been proposed, depending on the question type and the surrounding

context (e.g., Hohle, 1992; Creswell, 2000; Romero & Han, 2004; Biezma, 2009; Gutzmann &

Castroviejo Miro, 2011; Gutzmann, 2012; Lohnstein, 2012, 2016). Relevant for our purposes are

the following two effects. First, verum can indicate that the speaker had or has an epistemic bias

against the prejacent of the question (Romero & Han, 2004). For instance, Did Peter come? can

convey that the speaker of the question had assumed that Peter did not come. Second, Verum

33

34

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

can give rise to what Biezma (2009) called the cornering effect.13 Roughly, the cornering effect is

the `flavor' of impatience that a question signals when it is used to finally settle an issue, either
after a previous refusal by the addressee to give a straight answer, or after multiple commitments

by several interlocutors to both p and p (also Lohnstein, 2012, 2016). We argue that neither the

polar questions nor the declarative questions in the experiment occurred in contexts that would
license one of these effects of verum focus. We can see this when we examine the contextual
setup in more detail.

The polar questions in the experiment were preceded by turn-initial interjections like

Ach echt? `Oh, really?', which indicate a fairly high willingness of the speaker to accept the

contextually implied information as true. Such interjections are incompatible with the intention
to corner the addressee, which would require conflicting information about the prejacent of the

question or a lack of cooperation by the addressee. As for the function of verum to indicate
epistemic bias, this was blocked by the context following the question (e.g., `I would find that
exciting'), which signals that the speaker had no previous expectations regarding the questioned
proposition. Therefore, verum focus was not licit in the polar questions. This, in turn, made a
full accent shift away from given objects impossible.

Declarative questions do not seem to be able to give rise to cornering effects in general,

which might have to do with the fact that these questions always are biased: There must not
be evidence against the questioned proposition in the context or even evidence for it (e.g.,
Gunlogson, 2003; Safaova, 2005; Sudo, 2013; Trinh, 2014; Seeliger & Repp, 2018; Seeliger,

2019). We leave this issue for future research. For the current purposes we note that an accent

shift to the auxiliary in declarative questions can only give rise to the inference that the speaker
was previously biased with respect to the underlying proposition and is now resolving an

epistemic conflict between the contextual evidence and the previous assumption. To illustrate,
in (6) Belinda, who asks the question, assumed that Carl had never been to France because Carl
himself told her so. Ann's assertion in the preceding context creates an epistemic conflict, which
in Belinda's question is marked by verum focus.
(6)

13

Context: Ann and Belinda are discussing Carl's vacation. Ann states that Carl did not go to
France because he had already been there last summer. Belinda says:
Moment mal. Der WAR schon
mal in Frankreich?
moment once he was already once in France
Mir hat er was ganz Anderes erzahlt!
`Wait a minute. He HAS been to France before? He said something entirely different to me.'

Biezma (2009) coined the term for alternative questions. Beltrema et al. (2018) extended it to other questions.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

In our experiments, the speaker of the declarative questions always received new information
and was asking a double-check question - as was also indicated by turn-initial interjections

like Moment mal `Wait a moment'. Nothing in the context supported the necessary background
assumption that the speaker was previously biased about the proposition that is questioned in

the declarative question. The follow-up questions (e.g., `Doesn't he work in a plant nursery?'
after `He didn't bring flowers?') arguably are too weak to license verum: They only indicate that
the speaker has made a weak, defeasible inference (e.g., if someone works in a plant nursery

there is a good chance that they bring flowers). Something much stronger would be needed to
place the nuclear accent on the auxiliary (e.g., `I thought he brought half the plant nursery!'). In

other words, a previous weak assumption does not seem to be enough to license verum focus in
declarative questions, previous strong conviction is required.

What about the other potential target for the shifted accent: The negative determiner keine

`no'? Polarity focus can be expressed by negation, and we saw that participants often accented

keine. Yet the accent on keine tended to be pre-nuclear, instead of attracting the nuclear accent. It
turns out that an accent on keine can also indicate a different focus - depending on the prosodic

characteristics of the remainder of the clause. Intuitively, an accent on keine only expresses

polarity focus if the object is accented as well. If the object is deaccented, there is a narrow

focus reading where the focus alternatives are quantifiers: {none, a few, several, many, ...}. In (7),
where the stretch of speech after the prominent syllable of the determiner is compressed (marked

by italic font), the speaker is double-checking whether the subject referent really brought no
flowers at all - as opposed to just a few, which appears to be the speaker's original epistemic bias
with such a contour. Crucially, this reading is not salient in the experimental contexts.
(7)

Moment mal. Der hat KEIne Blumen mitgebracht?
moment once he has no
flowers brought
`Wait a minute. He didn't bring any flowers?'

As for why the accentuation of the object, even though it is given, appears to be necessary to

mark polarity focus, we tentatively suggest that polarity - or rather negation - is a propositional
operator and for focus on this operator to project to its scope position, the phrase containing the

negative determiner keine needs to be focus-marked. Just accenting the determiner apparently

cannot serve this purpose. This requires more scrutiny in future research on the syntax-prosodysemantics interface of negative sentences.

Finally turning to rejections, the nuclear accent can shift to the auxiliary, indicating verum

focus, as we saw in the data. The requirement imposed by verum that the speaker and/or the

context be biased with respect to the rejected proposition is fulfilled trivially in rejections: One
can only reject a proposition if one is biased against that proposition. A single accent on the

35

36

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

object would induce a contrastive reading (i.e., the speaker would reject only that the proposition
is true for the object referent). This contrastive reading was not supported by the experimental

context (no focus alternatives to the object denotation). Double accentuation - a nuclear accent
on the auxiliary and a post-nuclear accent on the object - is apparently dispreferred in rejections.

As the exponent of the polarity focus is not the same as in the negative declarative questions

(auxiliary vs. negative determiner), we think that this finding is not at odds with our proposal for
the accentuation pattern in the negative declarative questions.

Summarizing our discussion of givenness marking in the questions, we assume that

deaccentuation of given material is possible in questions, be they polar or declarative, but the
nuclear accent has to move to another element for structural prosodic reasons. If there is no

element available that could host the accent without triggering semantic-pragmatic effects that
are unlicensed in the context, given material needs to be accented. This account combines well
with the idea developed in Section 6.2, that there is no deterministic mapping from a meaning

category to prosody. The marking of givenness by a negative prominence balance in polar
questions conflicts with a structural prosodic requirement (headedness) and with other meaning-

prosody mappings (verum focus), which according to our findings `win over' givenness marking.
Exclamatives are different from the two question types and rejections. A nuclear accent on

the auxiliary with full deaccentuation of the object in principle appears to be possible, and does

not seem to give rise to verum-related readings or to contrast. This accentuation choice was thus
compatible with the experimental contexts. We take the fact that this contour is only very rarely

attested in the data14 as evidence for a genuine reduction of givenness marking in the exclamatives.

This view is further supported by the finding already discussed above, viz. that the d-pronoun,

which is given and not contrastive is a typical attractor of the exclamative accent. Intuitively, it is
unclear whether a nuclear accent on the d-pronoun with full deaccentuation of the object leads to
a contrastive focus reading of the d-pronoun. This needs to be tested in future research.

6.3. Methodological concerns
There are two methodological issues that we would like to address because they might be
thought to influence the results of our study. The first is that the experiment was run in two

recording sessions, which might have artificially boosted the differences between exclamatives
and questions, as one reviewer suggests: Speakers may sound different on different days. While
we agree with the latter observation, we do not think that the split into sessions has had a major

impact on our results. Recall that we counterbalanced the speech act type in the fillers: Each

session elicited one questioning and one non-questioning speech act, so that the mix of speech acts

in both sessions was comparable. Crucially, we consider it unlikely that our important findings
14

Twelve realizations by four participants in total.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

regarding IS-marking by (de)accentuation - or the lack thereof - are influenced by a split into

two sessions. There is no reason to believe that speakers would systematically accent words on
one day but not on another day. Similarly, we think that for instance pitch should be comparable

between recording sessions and it certainly should not differ systematically between sessions.
For intensity, which strongly depends on recording conditions, we either only compared data
from one recording session (on the syllable-level) or did not find a difference between speech

acts (on the utterance-level). Regarding the speaking rate differences between exclamatives and
questions, one might think that they arise from a training effect: Polar questions were elicited

in session 2, and they were faster. However, we consider a training effect unlikely: We did not
observe a training effect within the sessions. Moreover, our results replicate earlier findings.

The second methodological issue concerns our choice of only female participants. Overall,

we expect our results to generalize to male speakers, with some potential caveats. Regarding IS,

Repp (2020) reports for wh-exclamatives and wh-questions subtle phonetic differences for female

vs. male speakers such that some effects only showed in female speakers. Phonetic effects of, for
instance, interrogativity in Dutch have also been reported to be greater for female than for male

speakers (van Heuven & Haan, 2000; van Heuven & van Zanten, 2005). However, for German,

the opposite finding has been reported, with inter-individual variation being an additional, even

more important factor (Michalsky, 2017). Slightly different phonetic marking strategies for

narrow focus used by men and women were reported by Schmid and Moosmuller (2013). Thus,

the phonetic measures we found might not completely generalize to male speakers, although we
expect only small differences.

Concerning accentuation, there is a finding in our study which might be considered female-

specific. Recall that in the exclamatives, the finite auxiliary was rarely accented - which we

explained as arising from rhythmical factors. Repp (2020) reports for verb-second wh-exclamatives

that female speakers virtually never accented the auxiliary but almost always the d-pronoun,
whereas male speakers accented the auxiliary in about half of the productions. However, the
great preference for accenting d-pronouns in female speakers in comparison to male speakers was

not replicated in a follow-up study to Repp (2020), viz. Seeliger & Repp (in prep.): In verb-final
wh-exclamatives (in which it is ungrammatical to accent the auxiliary) male speakers accented
the d-pronoun in 99% of utterances, while female speakers did so in `only' 89%. Therefore,

we assume that accentuation choices in German exclamatives are not systematically linked to
speaker sex, but instead are most likely individual-specific.

7. Conclusion
The present study has explored the marking of givenness and contrast in non-assertive speech

acts. Our findings indicate that contrastive focus is consistently marked using prosodic means
in both polar exclamatives and in polar questions. The presence of a contrastive alternative in

37

38

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

the utterance context is necessary and, crucially, sufficient to trigger increased phonetic and

phonological prominence of the contrasted phrase itself (local marking) and decreased prominence
of other elements (non-local marking). Decreased prominence can impact the prenuclear region
to a substantial extent.

The prosodic marking of givenness, on the other hand, does not exclusively depend on

contextually induced givenness, which is necessary, but not sufficient to trigger reduced phonetic
and phonological prominence. Our data indicate that if accent shift to another element within

the utterance is pragmatically impossible, givenness marking results only in small continuous
differences for the given expression.

To capture the interplay of local and non-local effects of IS marking we have discussed

a potential optimality-theoretical implementation to capture what we have called prominence
balance. The prominence balance is positive for contrastive and negative for given elements.

Overall, our findings suggest that the investigation of IS and its prosodic reflections must

take into account what consequences prosodic prominence or the lack of prosodic prominence
has for (i) the prosodic structure of the utterance, (ii) for the semantic-pragmatic suitability of

that utterance in the context in terms of IS and in terms of speaker beliefs and intentions, and
(iii) for the speech act(s) that the utterance can express. Our data in conjunction with earlier

findings suggests that prosodic givenness marking is subordinate to other functions of prosody.
Contrast marking seems to have a greater functional pressure but we note that contrast marking

was not `in conflict' with other semantic-pragmatic or prosodic requirements to the extent that
givenness marking was. Contrast marking in exclamatives can make use of the flexibility that the

prosodic constructional default for that speech act offers: The requirement that there be (at least)
one prominent accent can be satisfied by placing the most prominent accent on the contrastively

focused element so that the IS requirement that the contrastively focused element be highly
prominent is also satisfied.

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Additional file
The additional file for this article can be found as follows:
* Complete Materials. Full set of experimental stimuli. DOI: https://doi.org/10.16995/
labphon.6451.s1

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Marlon Siewert, Hanna Maurer, and Jonilla Ried for help with creating the

materials, Jonilla Ried for speaking the part of speaker 1, and Lukas Kurzeja and Marlon Siewert

for their annotation work. We are also grateful to the associate editor Aoju Chen, as well as two
anonymous reviewers, for their invaluable feedback on the paper.

Funding information
Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) -
Project-ID 281511265 - SFB 1252.

Competing interests
The authors have no competing interests to declare.

Author contributions
Both authors designed the study and interpreted the data. The first author analyzed the data and

drafted the manuscript. The second author revised the manuscript. Both authors wrote parts of
the article and provided final approval for the submitted version.

References

Abels, K. (2010). Factivity in exclamatives is a presupposition. Studia Linguistica, 64(1), 141-157.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9582.2010.01164.x
Altmann, H. (1993). Satzmodus. In J. Jacobs, A. von Stechow, W. Sternefeld & T. Venneman
(Eds.), Syntax: Ein internationales Handbuch zeitgenossischer Forschung (pp. 1006-1029).
Berlin/New York: De Gruyter. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110095869.1.15.1006
Bates, D., Machler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects models using
lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01
Batliner, A. (1988a). Der Exklamativ: Mehr als Aussage oder nur mehr oder weniger Aussage? In
H. Altmann (Ed.), Intonationsforschungen (pp. 243-271). Tubingen: Niemeyer. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1515/9783111358413.243

39

40

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Batliner, A. (1988b). Produktion und Pradiktion. Die Rolle intonatorischer und anderer Merkmale
bei der Bestimmung des Satzmodus. In H. Altmann (Ed.), Intonationsforschungen (pp. 207-221).
Tubingen: Niemeyer. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111358413.207
Batliner, A. (1989). Wieviel Halbtone braucht die Frage? In H. Altmann, A. Batliner & W.
Oppenrieder (Eds.), Zur Intonation von Modus und Fokus im Deutschen (pp. 111-162). Tubingen:
Niemeyer. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111658384.111
Baumann, S. (2006). The intonation of givenness - Evidence from German. Tubingen: Niemeyer.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110921205
Baumann, S., Becker, J., Grice, M., & Mucke, D. (2007). Tonal and articulatory marking of focus
in German. In J. Trouvain & W. J. Barry (Eds.), Proceedings of the 16th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences (pp. 1029-1032). Saarbrucken: University of Saarbrucken.
Baumann, S., & Grice, M. (2006). The intonation of accessibility. Journal of Pragmatics, 38(10),
1636-1657. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2005.03.017
Baumann, S., Grice, M., & Steindamm, S. (2006). Prosodic marking of focus domains - categorical
or gradient? In R. Hoffmann & H. Mixdorff (Eds.), Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2006 (pp. 301-
304). Dresden: TUDpress.
Baumann, S., & Riester, A. (2013). Coreference, lexical givenness and prosody in German. Lingua,
136, 16-37. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2013.07.012
Baumann, S., & Rohr, C. (2015). The perceptual prominence of pitch accent types in German. In
The Scottish Consortium for ICPhS 2015 (Ed.), Proceedings of the 18th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences, paper number 298 (pp. 1-5). Glasgow: University of Glasgow.
Baumann, S., Rohr, C. T., & Grice, M. (2015). Prosodische (De-)Kodierung des Informationsstatus
im Deutschen. Zeitschrift fur Sprachwissenschaft, 34, 1-42. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/zfs2015-0001
Baumann, S., & Winter, B. (2018). What makes a word prominent? Predicting untrained German
listeners' perceptual judgments. Journal of Phonetics, 70, 20-38. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
wocn.2018.05.004
Beltrema, A., Meertens, E., & Romero, M. (2018). Decomposing cornering effects: an experimental
study. In U. Sauerland & S. Solt (Eds.), Proceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung 22 (vol. 1, pp. 175-190).
Berlin: ZAS. DOI: https://doi.org/10.21248/zaspil.60.2018.461
Biezma, M. (2009). Alternative vs polar questions: The cornering effect. In E. Cormany, S.
Ito & D. Lutz (Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th Semantics and Linguistic Theory Conference (SALT)
(pp. 37-54). Columbus, USA. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3765/salt.v19i0.2519
Boersma, P., & Weenink, D. (2021). Praat: doing phonetics by computer [computer program].
Version 6.1.40, retrieved 1 March 2021 from http://www.praat.org/
Boril, T., & Skarnitzl, R. (2016). Tools rPraat and mPraat. In P. Sojka, A. Horak, I. Kopecek
& K. Pala (Eds.), Proceedings of Text, Speech, and Dialogue: 19th International Conference (TSD).
Brno, Czech Republic (pp. 367-374). Cham: Springer International Publishing. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-45510-5_42

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Braun, B. (2006). Phonetics and phonology of thematic contrast in German. Language and
Speech, 49(4), 451-493. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/00238309060490040201
Braun, B., Dehe, N., Neitsch, J., Wochner, D., & Zahner, K. (2019). The prosody of rhetorical and
information-seeking questions in German. Language and Speech, 62(4), 779-807. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1177/0023830918816351
Braun, B., & Tagliapetra, L. (2010). The role of contrastive intonation contours in the retrieval of
contextual alternatives. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(7-9), 1024-1043. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1080/01690960903036836
Breen, M., Fedorenko, E., Wagner, M., & Gibson, E. (2010). Acoustic correlates of information
structure. Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(7-9), 1044-1098. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/
01690965.2010.504378
Cangemi, F., & Grice, M. (2016). The importance of a distributional approach to categoriality in
autosegmental-metrial accounts of intonation. Laboratory Phonology, 7(1), 1-20. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.5334/labphon.28
Chafe, W. (1976). Givenness, contrastiveness, definiteness, subjects, topics and point of view. In
C. Li (Ed.), Subject and Topic (pp. 25-56). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Chafe, W. (1994). Discourse, consciousness, and time. Chicago/London: University of Chicago
Press.
Chen, A. (2012). Shaping the intonation of wh-questions: information structure and beyond.
In J. P. de Ruiter (Ed.), Questions: Formal, functional and interactional perspectives (pp. 146-
164). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781139045414.010
Clark, H. H. (1977). Bridging. In P. N. Johnson-Laird & P. Cathcart Wason (Eds.), Thinking:
Readings in cognitive science (pp. 411-420). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Creswell, C. (2000). The discourse function of verum focus in wh-questions. In M. Hirotani,
A. Coetzee, N. Hall & J.-Y. Kim (Eds.), Proceedings of the North East Linguistics Society (NELS).
Groningen, Netherlands, (Vol. 30, No. 1, p. 165-180). Amherst, MA: GLSA.
d'Avis, F.-J. (2002). On the interpretation of wh-clauses in exclamative environments. Theoretical
Linguistics, 28, 5-31. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/thli.2002.28.1.5
d'Avis, F.-J. (2013). Exklamativsatz. In J. Meibauer, M. Steinbach & H. Altmann (Eds.),
Satztypen des Deutschen (pp. 171-201). Berlin/New York: De Gruyter. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1515/9783110224832.171
d'Avis, F.-J. (2016). Different languages - different sentence types? On exclamative sentences.
Language and Linguistics Compass, 10(4), 159-175. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12181
Essen, O. v. (1966). Allgemeine und angewandte Phonetik. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Fery, C. (1993). German intonational patterns. Tubingen: Niemeyer. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1515/9783111677606
Flemming, E. (2001). Scalar and categorical phenomena in a unified model of phonetics and
phonology. Phonology, 18(1), 7-44. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675701004006

41

42

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Grice, M., Baumann, S., & Benzmuller, R. (2005). German intonation in autosegmental-metrical
phonology. In S.-A. Jun (Ed.), Prosodic typology: The phonology of intonation and phrasing (pp.
55-83). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:
oso/9780199249633.003.0003
Grice, M., & Savino, M. (2003). Map tasks in Bari Italian: Asking questions about given, accessible
and new information. Catalan Journal of Linguistics, 2, 153-180. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5565/
rev/catjl.48
Grice, M., Ritter, S., Niemann, H., & Roettger, T. B. (2017). Integrating the discreteness and
continuity of intonational categories. Journal of Phonetics, 64, 90-107. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.wocn.2017.03.003
Gunlogson, C. (2003). True to form: Rising and falling declaratives as questions in English. New York,
NY: Routledge. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203502013
Gunlogson, C. (2008). A question of commitment. Belgian Journal of Linguistics, 22(1), 101-136.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1075/bjl.22.06gun
Gussenhoven, C. (1984). On the grammar and semantics of sentence accents. Dordrecht: Foris. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110859263
Gutzmann, D. (2012). Verum-Fokus-Verumfokus. In H. Lohnstein & H. Bluhdorn (Eds.),
Wahrheit-Fokus-Negation (pp. 69-104). Hamburg: Buske-Verlag.
Gutzmann, D., & Castroviejo Miro, E. (2011). The dimensions of verum. In O. Bonami & P.
Cabredo Hofherr (Eds.), Empirical issues in syntax and semantics 8 (pp. 143-165). Paris: Universite
Paris-Sorbonne.
Heuven, V. J. v., & Haan, J. (2000). Phonetic correlates of statement versus question intonation in
Dutch. In A. Botinis (Ed.), Intonation. Analysis, modelling and technology (pp. 119-144). Dordrecht,
The Netherlands: Kluwer. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-011-4317-2_6
Heuven, V. J. v., & Zanten, E. v. (2005). Speech rate as a secondary prosodic characteristic of
polarity questions in three languages. Speech Communication, 47(1-2), 87-99. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.specom.2005.05.010
Hohle, T. (1992). Uber Verum-Fokus im Deutschen. In J. Jacobs (Ed.), Informationsstruktur und
Grammatik (pp. 139-197). Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/9783-663-12176-3_5
Isaenko, A. V., & Schadlich, H.-J. (1966). Untersuchungen uber die deutsche Satzintonation.
In M. Bierwisch (Ed.), Untersuchungen uber Satz und Akzent im Deutschen (pp. 7-67). Berlin:
Akademie-Verlag.
Jacobs, J. (1988). Fokus-Hintergrund-Gliederung und
(Ed.), Intonationsforschungen (pp. 89-134). Tubingen:
org/10.1515/9783111358413.89

Grammatik. In H. Altmann
Niemeyer. DOI: https://doi.

Kohler, K. J. (1991). A model of German intonation. In K. J. Kohler (Ed.), Studies in German
Intonation (AIPUK 25) (pp. 205-215). Kiel: Kiel University.
Kohler, K. J. (2004). Pragmatic and attitudinal meanings of pitch patterns in German
syntactically marked questions. In G. Fant, H. Fujisaki, J. Cao & Y. Xu (Eds.), From traditional

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

phonology to modern speech processing (pp. 205-215). Peking: Foreign Language Teaching and
Research Press.
Krifka, M. (2008). Basic notions of information structure. Acta Linguistica Hungarica, 55(3-4),
243-276. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1556/ALing.55.2008.3-4.2
Kugler, F. (2003). Do we know the answer? Variation in yes-no-question intonation. In S. Fischer,
R. van de Vijver & R. Vogel (Eds.), Experimental Studies in Linguistics 1 (pp. 9-29). Potsdam:
Potsdam University Press.
Kugler, F., Baumann, S., Andreeva, B., Braun, B., Grice, M., Neitsch, J., Niebuhr, O., Peters,
J., Rohr, C., Schweitzer, A., & Wagner, P. (2019). Annotation of German intonation: DIMA
compared with other annotation systems. In S. Calhoun, P. Escudero, M. Tabain & P. Warren
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS). Melbourne,
Australia (pp. 1297-1301).
Kugler, F., & Fery, C. (2017). Postfocal downstep in German. Language and Speech, 60(2),
260-288. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0023830916647204
Kugler, F., & Genzel, S. (2012). On the prosodic expression of pragmatic prominence: The case
of pitch register lowering in Akan. Language and Speech, 55(3), 331-359. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1177/0023830911422182
Kugler, F., Smolibocki, B., Arnold, D., Baumann, S., Braun, B., Grice, M., Jannedy, S., Michalsky,
J., Niebuhr, O., Peters, J., Ritter, S., Rohr, C., Schweitzer, A., Schweitzer, K., & Wagner, P. (2015).
DIMA - Annotation guidelines for German intonation. In The Scottish Consortium for ICPhS
2015 (Eds.), Proceedings of the 18th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS). Glasgow,
Scotland (No. 317, pp. 1-5).
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., & Christensen, R. H. B. (2017). lmerTest package: Tests in
linear mixed effects models. Journal of Statistical Software, 82(13), 1-26. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.18637/jss.v082.i13
Ladd, D. R. (1980). The structure of intonational meaning: Evidence from English.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2979/TheStructureofIn
tona
Ladd, D. R., Verhoeven, J., & Jacobs, K. (1994). Influence of adjacent pitch accents on each
other's perceived prominence: Two contradictory effects. Journal of Phonetics, 22(1), 87-99. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0095-4470(19)30268-2
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence form. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511620607
Lohnstein, H. (2012). Verumfokus-Satzmodus-Wahrheit. In H. Lohnstein & H. Bluhdorn (Eds.),
Wahrheit-Fokus-Negation (pp. 31-66). Hamburg: Buske.
Lohnstein, H. (2016). Verum Focus. In C. Fery & S. Ishihara (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of
Information Structure (pp. 290-313). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199642670.013.33
Matuschek, H., Kliegl, R., Vasishth, S., Baayen, H., & Bates, D. (2017). Balancing type I error and
power in linear mixed models. Journal of Memory and Language, 94, 305-315. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jml.2017.01.001

43

44

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Michaelis, L., & Lambrecht, K. (1996). The exclamative sentence type in English. In A. E. Goldberg
(Ed.), Conceptual structure, discourse and language (pp. 375-389). Stanford: CSLI.
Michalsky, J. (2015). Pitch scaling as a perceptual cue for questions in German. In S. Moller,
H. Ney, B. Mobius, E. Noth & S. Steidl (Eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of
the International Speech Communication Association (INTERSPEECH). Dresden, Germany
(pp. 924-928). DOI: https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2015-13
Michalsky, J. (2017). Frageintonation im Deutschen: Zur intonatorischen Markierung von
Interrogativitat und Fragehaltigkeit. Berlin/New York: De Gruyter. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1515/9783110538564
Molnar, V. (2002). Contrast - from a contrastive perspective. In H. Hasselgard, S. Johansson,
B. Behrens & C. Fabricius-Hansen (Eds.), Information Structure in a Cross-Linguistic Perspective,
Leiden, Netherlands (pp. 99-114). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004334250_010
Mucke, D., & Grice, M. (2014). The effect of focus marking on supralaryngeal articulation - is
it mediated by accentuation? Journal of Phonetics, 44, 47-61. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
wocn.2014.02.003
Neitsch, J., & Niebuhr, O. (2019). Questions as prosodic configurations: How prosody and context
shape the multiparametric acoustic nature of rhetorical questions in German. In S. Calhoun, P.
Escudero, M. Tabain & P. Warren (Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences (ICPhS). Melbourne, Australia (pp. 2425-2429).
Niebuhr, O., Bergherr, J., Huth, S., Lill, C., & Neuschulz, J. (2010). Intonationsfragen hinterfragt
- Die Vielschichtigkeit der prosodischen Unterschiede zwischen Aussage- und Fragesatzen mit
deklarativer Syntax. Zeitschrift fur Dialektologie und Linguistik, 77(3), 304-346. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.25162/zdl-2010-0010
Oppenrieder, W. (1988). Intonatorische Kennzeichnung von Satzmodi. In H. Altmann
(Ed.), Intonationsforschungen (pp. 69-205). Tubingen: Niemeyer. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1515/9783111358413.169
Petrone, C., & Niebuhr, O. (2014). On the intonation of German intonation questions:
The role of the prenuclear region. Language and Speech, 57(1), 108-146. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1177/0023830913495651
Prince, E. F. (1981). Toward a taxonomy of given-new information. In P. Cole (Ed.), Radical
pragmatics (pp. 223-256). New York, NY: Academic Press.
R Core Team. (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. Retrieved from https://www.R-project.org.
Repp, S. (2015). On the acoustics of wh-exclamatives and wh-interrogatives: Effects of
information structure and sex of speaker. In The Scottish Consortium for ICPhS 2015 (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 18th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS). Glasgow, Scotland (No.
319, pp. 1-5).
Repp, S. (2016). Contrast: Dissecting an elusive information-structural notion and its role
in grammar. In C. Fery & S. Ishihara (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Information Structure
(pp. 270-289). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordhb/9780199642670.013.006

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of ) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Repp, S. (2020). The prosody of wh-exclamatives and wh-questions in German: Speech act
differences, information structure, and sex of speaker. Language and Speech, 63(2), 306-361.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0023830919846147
Repp, S., & Rosin, L. (2015). The intonation of echo wh-questions. In S. Moller, H. Ney, B. Mobius,
E. Noth & S. Steidl (Eds.), Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of the International Speech
Communication Association (INTERSPEECH). Dresden, Germany (pp. 938-942). DOI: https://doi.
org/10.21437/Interspeech.2015-16
Repp, S., & Seeliger, H. (2020). Prosodic prominence in polar questions and exclamatives.
Frontiers in Communication, 5(53), 1-26. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2020.00053
Roessig, S. (2021). Categoriality and continuity in prosodic prominence. Berlin: Language Science
Press. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4121875
Roessig, S., & Mucke, D. (2019). Modeling dimensions of prosodic prominence. Frontiers in
Communication, 4(44), 1-19. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2019.00044
Rohr, C. T., & Baumann, S. (2010). Prosodic marking of information status in German. Proceedings
of the Fifth International Conference on Speech Prosody. Chicago, USA (pp. 1-5).
Romero, M., & Han, C.-H. (2004). On negative yes/no questions. Linguistics and Philosophy, 27(5),
609-658. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1023/B:LING.0000033850.15705.94
Rosengren, I. (1992). Zur Grammatik und Pragmatik der Exklamation. In I. Rosengren
(Ed.), Satz und Illokution 1 (pp. 263-306). Tubingen: Niemeyer. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1515/9783111353210.263
Rosengren, I. (1997). Expressive sentence types - a contradiction in terms. The case of exclamation.
In T. Swan & O. J. Westvik (Eds.), Modality in Germanic languages (pp. 151-184). Berlin/New
York: De Gruyter Mouton. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110889932.151
Safaova, M. 2005. The semantics of rising intonation in interrogatives and declaratives. In E.
Maier, C. Bary & J. Huitink (Eds.), Proceedings of Sinn und Bedeutung 9. Nijmegen, Netherlands
(pp. 355-369).
Schmid, C., & Moosmuller, C. (2013). Gender differences in the phonetic realization of semantic
focus. In P. Mertens & A. C. Simon (Eds.), Proceedings of the Prosody-Discourse Interface Conference
2013 (IDP-2013). Leuven, September 11-13 (pp. 119-124). Retrieved from https://www.arts.
kuleuven.be/ling/cohistal/conference/idp2013/documents/proceedings_idp2013
Schneider, K., & Lintfert, B. (2003). Categorical perception of boundary tones in German. In M.
J. Sole, D. Recasens & J. Romero (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th International Congress of Phonetic
Sciences (ICPhS). Barcelona, Spain (pp. 631-634).
Seeliger, H. (2019). Swedish and German rejecting questions. Experimental investigations of
question bias. (Doctoral dissertation). Humboldt-Universitat zu Berlin. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.18452/19686
Seeliger, H., & Repp, S. (2017). On the intonation of Swedish rejections and rejecting questions.
In J. Eggesbo Abramsen, J. Koreman & W. van Dommelen (Eds.), Proceedings of the 12th Conference
of Nordic Prosody. Trondheim, Norway (pp. 135-146). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

45

46

Seeliger and Repp: Information-structural surprises? Contrast, givenness, and (the lack of) accent
shift and deaccentuation in non-assertive speech acts

Seeliger, H., & Repp, S. (2018). Biased declarative questions in Swedish and German: The
syntax of negation meets modal particles (val and doch wohl). In C. Dimroth & S. Sudhoff (Eds.),
The grammatical realization of polarity contrast: Theoretical, empirical, and typological approaches
(pp. 129-172). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1075/
la.249.05see
Seeliger, H., & Repp, S. (2020). Competing prominence-requirements in verb-first exclamatives
with contrastive and given information. Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
on Speech Prosody 2020. Tokyo, Japan (pp. 141-145). DOI: https://doi.org/10.21437/
SpeechProsody.2020-29
Seeliger, H., & Repp, S. (in preparation). Facets of prosodic prominence marking in non-assertive
speech acts: cumulativity, non-locality, and constructional defaults. Ms.
Selkirk, E. O. (1984). Phonology and syntax: The relation between sound and structure. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Selting, M. (1995). Prosodie im Gesprach: Aspekte einer interaktionalen Phonologie der Konversation.
Berlin/New York: De Gruyter. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110934717
Singmann, H., Bolker, B., Westfall, J., Aust, F., & Ben-Shachar, M. S. (2021). afex: Analysis of
Factorial Experiments. R package version 0.28-1. Retrieved from https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=afex
Sudo, Y. (2013). Biased polar questions in English and Japanese. In D. Gutzmann & H.-M. Gartner
(Eds.), Beyond Expressives - Explorations in Use-Conditional Meaning (pp. 275-296). Leiden: Brill.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004183988_009
Trinh, T. (2014). How to ask the obvious: A presuppositional account of evidential bias in English
yes/no questions. In L. Crni, I. R. Heim & U. Sauerland (Eds.), The art and craft of semantics: A
festschrift for Irene Heim 2 (pp. 227-249). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ventura, C., Grice, M., Savino, M., Kolev, D., Brilmayer, I., & Schumacher, P. B. (2020). Attention
allocation in a language with post-focal prominences. Neuroreport, 31(8), 624-628. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0000000000001453
Wochner, D., Schlegel, J., Dehe, N., & Braun, B. (2015). The prosodic marking of rhetorical
questions in German. In S. Moller, H. Ney, B. Mobius, E. Noth & S. Steidl (Eds.), Proceedings of
the 16th Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association (INTERSPEECH).
Dresden, Germany (pp. 987-991). DOI: https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2015-26
Xu, Y., & Xu, C. X. (2005). Phonetic realization of focus in English. Journal of Phonetics, 33(2),
159-197. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2004.11.001
Zanuttini, R., & Portner, P. (2003). Exclamative clauses: At the syntax-semantics interface.
Language, 79(1), 39-81. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1353/lan.2003.0105

